[Amit Varma]: How do we learn something?
[Amit Varma]: One way is to do what Indians call Rattamaro, rote learning.
[Amit Varma]: Learn some instructions by heart and then hope that works out.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a horrible way to learn anything.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to figure out how to play chess, for example, a good coach won't make you
[Amit Varma]: memorize theory on day one, E4-C5 is a Sicilian defense, D4-D5-C4 is a Queen's Gambit and
[Amit Varma]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, you should first be taught the basic principles of the game, the importance of
[Amit Varma]: space, of occupying the center, developing your pieces, the importance of initiative
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: This way, whenever you encounter an unfamiliar position, you can just apply these principles
[Amit Varma]: and figure out what to do.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, a good poker coach won't begin by making you mug up ranges in different spots.
[Amit Varma]: This is your 15 BB shoving range from the hijack.
[Amit Varma]: This is your 22 BB reshove range from the big blind and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Again, you're better off learning broad principles first.
[Amit Varma]: This should be common sense.
[Amit Varma]: But it isn't.
[Amit Varma]: So many of us, me included, try to learn about cooking and food by reading and trying out
[Amit Varma]: recipes.
[Amit Varma]: But to understand the subject, we don't just need to know what to do.
[Unknown]: We need to understand why we are doing it.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is polymath thinker and unassuming artist Krish Ashok.
[Amit Varma]: There has never been a guest on the show who is such a perfect blend of the artistic and
[Amit Varma]: the analytical.
[Amit Varma]: Ashok has been an internet legend in India for over a decade now.
[Amit Varma]: He's known as a brilliant humorist and musician, but he's also a systematic thinker about any
[Amit Varma]: subject that interests him.
[Amit Varma]: And in this episode, we are going to discuss his brilliant book, Masala Lab.
[Amit Varma]: This is a book that gets meta about cooking.
[Amit Varma]: It takes a step back from the world of recipes and looks into the science behind cooking.
[Amit Varma]: It approaches everything from first principles.
[Amit Varma]: In the process, it shows us why so much of the traditional wisdom about food that we
[Amit Varma]: get from our grandmothers is bang on.
[Amit Varma]: The book also contains an immense number of TIL revelations, even jaw dropping ones.
[Amit Varma]: I love books that get meta like this, that go back to first principles.
[Amit Varma]: I'd done an episode almost a year ago with Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah on their book in
[Amit Varma]: service of the Republic, which looked at public policy from a similar meta lens.
[Amit Varma]: And I am now writing a book called Hacking Cricket, which takes a similar approach to
[Amit Varma]: cricket strategy.
[Amit Varma]: That made me warm to Masala Lab right away, as I love books that take this kind of approach.
[Amit Varma]: And Ashok's book is spectacular.
[Amit Varma]: It's accessible, insightful, and inspiring.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, after reading this intro, I'm probably going to head on over to my kitchen.
[Amit Varma]: And I should probably say this in a whisker, but I might just end up making Maggie.
[Amit Varma]: A quick note before we begin, though, we used a specific software I won't name or use again
[Amit Varma]: for the remote recording of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: And while the sound seemed fine to me through my monitor headphones, my audio file, not
[Amit Varma]: Ashok's, my audio file got all messed up and distorted.
[Amit Varma]: The conversation was so wonderful that I was pretty upset.
[Amit Varma]: But my editor Vijay managed to salvage it enough for us to be able to release this.
[Amit Varma]: So kindly excuse the quality of my audio.
[Amit Varma]: I hope the quality of the conversation will make up for it.
[Amit Varma]: Before we start, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: By the time this episode ends, you'll be dying to dive into the rabbit hole that is food
[Amit Varma]: and learn more about cooking and cuisines.
[Amit Varma]: The links in the show notes should help you.
[Amit Varma]: But I have one more resource for you.
[Amit Varma]: This episode is sponsored by The Great Courses Plus at thegreatcoursesplus.com.
[Amit Varma]: And I've spent the last couple of days lost inside one of their courses called Cooking
[Amit Varma]: Across the Ages by Ken Albala.
[Amit Varma]: This course is divided into 24 lectures and discusses cooking and food science and the
[Amit Varma]: various cuisines of ancient Rome, imperial China, medieval France, Renaissance, Italy,
[Amit Varma]: and it takes us into the kitchens of the Vikings and the Aztecs, the Germans and the Brazilians,
[Amit Varma]: mouthwatering stuff.
[Amit Varma]: Check it out at thegreatcoursesplus.com, where you'll also find a fantastic library of online
[Amit Varma]: courses from subjects ranging from music, math, cooking, history, political theory,
[Amit Varma]: and so much else.
[Amit Varma]: They also have an app where you can listen to the audio of these courses the same way
[Amit Varma]: you listen to podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: What's not to like?
[Amit Varma]: Do try it out.
[Amit Varma]: It will cost you nothing.
[Amit Varma]: You get one month of unlimited free access if you use the following URL, thegreatcoursesplus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen, that's right, unseen, thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen for one month of unlimited free
[Amit Varma]: access.
[Amit Varma]: Go for it.
[Amit Varma]: Ashok, welcome to the Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: It's been a long time coming.
[Amit Varma]: I have to, by the way, tell my listeners that before the show started, I figured that there
[Amit Varma]: was an awkward question I had to ask.
[Amit Varma]: So I did not make an awkward mistake through the show, which was to ask Ashok what I should
[Amit Varma]: call him, Krish or Ashok.
[Amit Varma]: And he told me that the correct name to use is Ashok.
[Amit Varma]: So I have saved myself from committing what Ashok would call an Amit mistake.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to first of all say that how glad I am that you are here.
[Amit Varma]: We have never met in person, but I have been following you all the way since the blogging
[Amit Varma]: days and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And when I started the show, I thought it would be great to have you one day on the
[Amit Varma]: show.
[Amit Varma]: And we spoke about it a couple of years back and you said, yeah, when you're in Bangalore,
[Amit Varma]: just give me a buzz if I happen to be making a business trip there, we'll kind of do it.
[Amit Varma]: And that never happened.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, who has to leave their city in these crazy times.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to start off with my podcast version of, you know, chop some onions and
[Amit Varma]: saute them in oil till they get translucent, which is, you know, the cliched way in which
[Amit Varma]: so many Indian recipes start.
[Amit Varma]: And I like to kind of start my podcast by not talking about whatever the subject in
[Amit Varma]: question is, but rather by asking my guests about their personal journey, which is specifically
[Amit Varma]: interesting to me in your case, because even though we'll speak much of this episode talking
[Amit Varma]: about your wonderful eye-opening book, you're a man of many parts.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I did not know you as a food person back in the day, I knew you as a humorist
[Amit Varma]: and then a music person.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about your journey.
[Amit Varma]: What's your journey been like so far?
[Guest]: It's been, I mean, nothing tremendously unique about it, except that I was born in Chennai.
[Guest]: And then, but my father had one of those rare Tambaram jobs that involved him getting transferred
[Guest]: all over.
[Guest]: And it was actually in business, right?
[Guest]: A very rare thing for a Tambaram family to be in.
[Guest]: And my mother worked in a bank.
[Guest]: And then we literally lived all over India.
[Guest]: So we changed schools every few years and so on.
[Guest]: And so I grew up everywhere.
[Guest]: And my father's side of the family is slightly odd in that his father was an atheist, an
[Guest]: avowed atheist, which is very strange to be someone like that in the 1930s or 40s, in
[Guest]: the deep south of Tamil Nadu, a very, very religious place and so on, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so atheist to the point that he did not allow, you know, idols or any kind of
[Guest]: religious worship in the house.
[Guest]: I mean, he was quite militant about it, right?
[Guest]: And so my father grew up in a very interesting environment.
[Guest]: He later in life, he became pretty religious.
[Guest]: But I think he had that sense that his children should have the freedom to, you know, do what
[Guest]: they please, in the sense that I think, normally, when you kind of question religious tradition
[Guest]: and all of that, you know, you'll get a very stern put down, right?
[Guest]: If you're one of these traditional sort of religious families, which I wasn't.
[Guest]: My mother's side of the family is mostly priests.
[Guest]: I mean, what two generations ago, they were just all priests.
[Guest]: And so you can see sort of the contrast, they were just, my mother tried very hard to get
[Guest]: us to be religious and so on.
[Guest]: So from what you can see on my blog and other things, clearly, that didn't work on any of
[Guest]: us.
[Guest]: I mean, there were three of us.
[Guest]: There was me, my middle sibling, who works in Microsoft, and the youngest guy, who's
[Guest]: a graphic novelist and illustrator and works in China, right?
[Guest]: So you know, I think the mother's side of the family is also predominantly musical,
[Guest]: in the sense that a ton of her female relatives are all professional musicians.
[Guest]: And so obviously, I think music was something that I had to learn the violin.
[Guest]: I had no choice.
[Guest]: It wasn't very enjoyable when I was eight or nine years old.
[Guest]: It's a painful instrument to play.
[Guest]: It takes six or seven years before you like the sound of what you're playing.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, later in life, I tend to rate musical instruments by an acronym called
[Guest]: mean time to sonic palatability, which is that, you know, a keyboard is that you pick
[Guest]: it up, and it'll sound decent, you know, in about five minutes, right?
[Guest]: But a violin takes, you know, six or seven years, and it's quite painful.
[Guest]: But I think once I kind of got the hang of it, I became reasonably good.
[Guest]: And I was actually, through my college, I was actually learning under a very famous
[Guest]: violinist who recently passed away, Padma Bhushan TN Krishnan, right?
[Guest]: And he was one of those serious guys who said, you know, you need to quit your engineering
[Guest]: and come join me, you know, become a professional musician and so on.
[Guest]: And you know, my father said, not quite sure, right?
[Guest]: So he kind of, he was smart enough to realize that this is a very long day, in that very
[Guest]: few people become very successful and the rest is, you know, we didn't have quite have
[Guest]: the connections as well.
[Guest]: And this is one of those very insular, Carnatic music is one of those kinds of places, right?
[Guest]: You still needed connections, you know, you still had to be reasonably rich and so on.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, that's how my musical journey kind of began.
[Guest]: I was, till my mid-20s, I was still thinking, should I do a full-time career in Carnatic
[Guest]: music or not, right?
[Guest]: And then, you know, one thing led to another, I essentially picked up a profession that
[Guest]: I felt at that time was the, you know, in the late 90s, was the most amount of money
[Guest]: for the least amount of effort, which is software, right?
[Guest]: And also the one that kind of gave me the most amount of free time to pursue other things,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean, in 1999 to 2000, having Saturday and Sunday off was a rarity, right?
[Guest]: And the IT industry was literally the only, you know, one that actually had this sort
[Guest]: of thing.
[Guest]: So I joined TCS straight out of college.
[Guest]: I went to, so what is now called Netaji Subhash Institute of Technology used to be called
[Guest]: DIT, part of the Delhi College of Engineering, sort of this thing, right?
[Guest]: And I, you know, I worked in software and I, every five years, every time I would get
[Guest]: bored, I mean, I just had the fortune of having a boss who said, yeah, I'll give you something
[Guest]: interesting to do.
[Guest]: And so it's good.
[Guest]: So, you know, the sense that I've been with my job for almost 21 years and I absolutely
[Guest]: love it.
[Guest]: I mean, it is, although it's my livelihood and it pays for all of the fancy stuff that
[Guest]: I have at my studio, but it's a job that I would not think of giving up, despite the
[Guest]: fact that I have all these other hobbies.
[Guest]: And hobbies is something that I kind of continuously picked up.
[Guest]: I was living in the US for about seven years.
[Guest]: That was when I started seriously getting into Western music, kind of learned composition,
[Guest]: went to a conservatory and learned to play the keyboard, started learning the guitar
[Guest]: from YouTube, the first generation of YouTube and so on.
[Guest]: And I think I've watched more YouTube bars than most people.
[Guest]: So I watch it at, you know, two to three X.
[Guest]: So I, you know, so I get through a lot of it.
[Guest]: So I think, so that is how I started getting into a lot of these hobbies.
[Guest]: I was always into writing or human writing since school, it was mostly cheesy stuff,
[Guest]: but it was, I think it was around 2008 when the financial crisis happened and my father's
[Guest]: business kind of went under and it was actually a bad time.
[Guest]: And so he was terribly under debt and, you know, we were all sort of struggling to stay
[Guest]: afloat and I had to sort of use every little bit of my sort of financial resources to sort
[Guest]: of, you know, bring things back under control.
[Guest]: That was actually when I decided, fine, you know what, as an outlet, let me sort of, you
[Guest]: know, go on to social media and start expressing those and get that kind of feedback.
[Guest]: Before that, I was a very private person, I still am in the sense that I don't, I don't
[Guest]: go to parties.
[Guest]: I don't sort of, I don't like small talk and so on, but I enjoyed, you know, putting out
[Guest]: crazy creative stuff and, you know, engaging with people online.
[Guest]: And that's when, you know, I ran into you.
[Guest]: You were one of the superstars of the Indian blogging environment already when I just started
[Guest]: blogging and so on.
[Guest]: And I think that that generation of people who kind of, you know, started expressing
[Guest]: these interesting ideas and had the feedback from people.
[Guest]: So that is how I started blogging and then I used that medium as a, I was always into
[Guest]: sort of more visual creativity.
[Guest]: So I like making a lot of pictures and Photoshop memes and, and also mixing music and visuals
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Amidst all of this, I mean, I was always cooking, right?
[Guest]: So I was always someone who learned to cook very young when I was a teenage boy, my mother
[Guest]: was working.
[Guest]: So when she was either away or on travel, I would be the one to cook at home.
[Guest]: So I was always there.
[Guest]: It's just that I started sort of taking the science part a lot more seriously, I guess
[Guest]: about seven or eight years ago, which is when I started, I would say writing down pieces
[Guest]: that ultimately went with this book didn't come together in like, you know, just the
[Guest]: first three months of the pandemic.
[Guest]: I noted down a lot of things that ultimately, you know, I did a lot of experiments at home
[Guest]: to be able to over time sort of write this book, right?
[Guest]: So that's, that's been my journey.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I found fascinating about the book, in fact, the thing that I
[Amit Varma]: really liked about it, particularly is that this is not about, you're not giving us gyan
[Amit Varma]: about food or giving us recipes or whatever, you're taking a step back getting meta, just
[Amit Varma]: talking about, you know, the sort of the first principles that animate the art and craft
[Amit Varma]: of cooking.
[Amit Varma]: And I was drawn to that, because that's something that I tried to do in some of the various
[Amit Varma]: things that I've done, whether it was, you know, playing poker, or whether you know,
[Amit Varma]: the first thing I tell people who do my writing course is that, listen, I'm not going to give
[Amit Varma]: you a bunch of guidelines, like I'm some kind of Sri Sri writing Shankar and these are the
[Amit Varma]: 10 commandments.
[Amit Varma]: But let's get back to first principles.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, build our own frame.
[Amit Varma]: Now, is this way of thinking something that is inherent to how you approach everything?
[Amit Varma]: For example, even learning music, where first you start the violin as a kid, and I guess
[Amit Varma]: it's in the Carnatic tradition, where as you have pointed out, not much is codified, a
[Amit Varma]: lot of it is just like passed on from guru to shishya and so on you, you know, you wrote
[Amit Varma]: in your book about how Indian cooking is so much like Indian music in that sense, that
[Amit Varma]: there is no codification.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost treated as a mystical art that has to be passed on, whether it is from a
[Amit Varma]: grandmother in the kitchen, or from an ustad with whom you sort of go and learn.
[Amit Varma]: So did you always have that kind of mindset that you're trying to break things down, you're
[Guest]: taking a step back and thinking of stuff?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, I've always greatly enjoyed science, right from when I was very young, especially
[Guest]: physics, chemistry, biology, and mathematics, all of it, I think the one caveat being that
[Guest]: I was not such a big fan of speed, right, in the sense that a lot of your entrance exams
[Guest]: really test for speed, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I like solving very complex physics problems over a day, as opposed to 50 problems
[Guest]: in 90 minutes, which I was very bad at.
[Guest]: And in that sense, so when I attempted to do that, it was almost always since I was
[Guest]: very bad at memorization.
[Guest]: So very early, I really had sort of picked up this habit of trying to kind of derive
[Guest]: first principles so that I could derive anything I wanted rather than memorize.
[Guest]: So this was something that was always there.
[Guest]: In a sense, it also served me well in my software career, because that's basically it, right?
[Guest]: At the end of the day, you're trying to solve a very, very hard and complex problem with
[Guest]: people who are largely very young, inexperienced, are going to write terrible code.
[Guest]: So therefore, you need to really get down to first principles, and you need to let the
[Guest]: process be documented to the point where you don't blame the person.
[Guest]: But your software is still, you know, does what it needs to do, right?
[Guest]: So I think, you know, a lot of the approach of the book, in some sense, is also that.
[Guest]: So it's algorithmic, it's really, you know, rather than memorize or learn, you know, recipes,
[Guest]: is there a more simpler way to break it down or to teach people?
[Guest]: And in a sense, this is the reason I saw that this was an opportunity in the Indian cooking
[Guest]: space.
[Guest]: Because there's a fair number of food science books in the West, you know, Kenji Alt Lopez
[Guest]: and Harold McGee and others, and have really broken down a lot of Western cooking, largely
[Guest]: European cooking, if you will, into into very, very granular, easy to understand principles
[Guest]: with a great amount of precision.
[Guest]: And for some reason, that's not there for Indian cooking, and you know, it's not surprising.
[Guest]: Most cooking is and was largely done by women with little choice in the matter at home.
[Guest]: And you know, till about 50-60 years back, they did not have access to education either.
[Guest]: So and we are largely an oral tradition, you know, kind of culture, and so very little.
[Guest]: So it's literally think about this, right?
[Guest]: So this, you can, you can literally name just one, you know, famous cookbook called the
[Guest]: Manasolasa written like in the 12th century, in Sanskrit by the Chalukyan Empire.
[Guest]: And even that really doesn't get into the specifics, it doesn't get into clearly the
[Guest]: guy writing it, probably never cooked, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it was, you know, apparently written by the emperor himself.
[Guest]: So clearly he didn't cook, right?
[Guest]: But what's interesting is that there seems to be a complete lack of craft, if you will.
[Guest]: So that's the distinction I make, right?
[Guest]: So art is something it's crutable, it's exotic, you know, it's, you just need to get it, it's,
[Guest]: you have a new intuitive sense, and so on.
[Guest]: But craft is, craft needs documentation, craft needs precision, craft needs explanations
[Guest]: for why you're doing what you're doing, right, as opposed to, and also a sense of a lot of
[Guest]: the grandmother's wisdom, tacit wisdom ends up being right, it works, but you know, we
[Guest]: don't know why it works.
[Guest]: And in the internet misinformation universe that we have, it's now becoming increasingly
[Guest]: hard to figure out, you know, what is actually verified and what is unverified.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, like turmeric curing COVID and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: A tangential question, since you mentioned art and craft, is that my sense of art and
[Amit Varma]: craft has increasingly come to be that, that is really not much of a difference.
[Amit Varma]: The key difference is that art is that part of the craft, which you haven't thought about
[Amit Varma]: consciously or can't articulate, but they amount to the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, since you're a musician as well, I'll ask your opinion in that context, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in music, also, I am sure you can sort of take a step back and get back to first
[Amit Varma]: principles that these combination of notes, spark of, you know, these effects in the brain,
[Amit Varma]: and that is why we find them pleasant, and we find something else noisy, and blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah.
[Amit Varma]: And I think part of the art of coming up with something that sounds pleasant, is actually
[Amit Varma]: using this internalized knowledge, which you haven't yet put into words or articulated.
[Amit Varma]: And whatever you can articulate automatically becomes craft, because you can, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm just kind of thinking aloud, but what's your sense of this?
[Guest]: I think it's, you know, I would say music, and other sort of traditional arts, if you
[Guest]: will, be a drama or film or anything, right?
[Guest]: Works slightly different.
[Guest]: Definitely, I think, you know, if yes, culinary arts is there, but I would, we're really talking
[Guest]: about a Michelin star or a famous chef who's creating something that you simply cannot
[Guest]: reduce down to just the technique and so on.
[Guest]: There is clearly something magical about that inspiration, just like, you know, you can
[Guest]: analyze jazz music all you want, right?
[Guest]: But the reality is that when jazz music came out onto the stage in the 20s, and so on,
[Guest]: a lot of Western classical musicians and critics were like, this is just atonal, this is violating
[Guest]: every bit of harmony theory that we knew.
[Guest]: But yet, I mean, it really just went on to become the predominant popular form of music,
[Guest]: and it actually influenced classical music.
[Guest]: You know, the last stage of Western classical musicians, the Shostakovich, you know, a lot
[Guest]: of the Russian composers and so on, Mahler and others, really stopped doing the usual
[Guest]: formulaic harmony arrangements and started doing things that sounded a lot more jarring
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And if you will really set the stage for, you know, the kind of cinematic music that
[Guest]: you hear from say Hans Zimmer, or anyone or John Williams, so that you kind of set the
[Guest]: mood in a way, because you need a wider range, you need to be a lot more experimental beyond
[Guest]: just what the rules of harmony tell you, right?
[Guest]: And that in a sense, that's true for, you know, a painting or sculpture, so on.
[Guest]: It's hard to break down, say, the David in Florence, just down to the fact that it's
[Guest]: about these are the proportions and that the distance between the eyes and so and so, there's
[Guest]: a golden ratio involved in all of this.
[Guest]: So there's, you know, all that post-facto analysis to try to make craft out of an art
[Guest]: is definitely is a very common phenomenon in other kind of arts.
[Guest]: In this case, the only distinction I want to make is that I think cooking at home should
[Guest]: not be that, because at the end of the day, it's a high pressure daily thing that you
[Guest]: do three times.
[Guest]: It should not be art.
[Guest]: It should not be something that you need to be mentored by a seasoned person for many
[Guest]: years to learn.
[Guest]: It should be something that you can just pick up quickly, because at the end of the day,
[Guest]: you know, cooking by yourself, fixing your nutrition is one of the single most important
[Guest]: things that you will do from a health standpoint, right?
[Guest]: And so in that sense, I think that's the distinction I'm trying to make.
[Guest]: As I clearly say, the book is not aimed at making you a great chef.
[Guest]: It's aimed at making you a better home cook.
[Guest]: And home cooking is an engineering discipline.
[Guest]: It should not be like art.
[Guest]: It should not be this inscrutable thing.
[Guest]: Yes, of course, right?
[Guest]: Even in home cooking, you know, you sometimes have these, you'll remember your grandmother
[Guest]: or your mother or some relatives, fantastic, you know, a chicken biryani or a dal or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: But remember that a lot of that has to do with nostalgia.
[Guest]: Our perception of flavor is done in the same part of the brain that processes nostalgia
[Guest]: and memories.
[Guest]: And this is something that I call out in that flavor chapter.
[Guest]: So that's why your restaurant dal can't compete with your grandmother's dal, not because it's
[Guest]: objectively better, because you simply have better memories of it.
[Guest]: And once it's tied into those memories and memories are formed, that's what, you know,
[Guest]: that's what enhances the experience of food itself.
[Guest]: So it is very much, you basically, for the most part, that's the sort of magical experience
[Guest]: you're thinking about.
[Guest]: It's not art.
[Guest]: That's really just, you know, neurology, if you will, right?
[Guest]: The craft essentially is fundamentally about saying, look, you know, there is a documentation
[Guest]: problem.
[Guest]: People tell you things like cook, you know, tamarind till the raw smell goes away.
[Guest]: Those are terrible instructions.
[Guest]: You know, how does that translate into writing?
[Guest]: How does that translate into knowledge that you can actually pass on to someone else?
[Guest]: Because you can't literally describe smells in that.
[Guest]: But you can say, you know, cook the tamarind till it tastes as sour or as less sour as
[Guest]: you like it.
[Guest]: That's a better instruction, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if you want to be really precise, if you're in the food industry, you will say
[Guest]: use a pH strip and measure to see if the pH is between 4 or 4.5, because all great food
[Guest]: is typically in the range of 4 to 4.5 pH.
[Guest]: I mean, that's what, you know, chefs and Western food scientists have said.
[Guest]: But yeah, so that's the idea is to bring some basic level of craft and engineering and better
[Guest]: knowledge if you will, to what is essentially a very daily laborious activity.
[Guest]: And so that's, that was the point.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, what I was kind of getting at is that craft is underrated, you know, people will
[Amit Varma]: often have this hierarchy where art is up there and is mystical and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And craft is below that you're just going through the motions.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that that's really unfair that ultimately, you know, the finest art is what
[Amit Varma]: will eventually one day perhaps become craft when people understand it well enough.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the book, a sort of a final question that is not to do with the book or
[Amit Varma]: not to do with food, which is, I'm very curious about your methods of knowledge management
[Amit Varma]: and how you organize all of that, like, and also a tangential question that how do you
[Amit Varma]: listen at 3x?
[Amit Varma]: You once mentioned that you listen to my podcast at 3x.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when I tell others that I myself listen in between 2 and 2.5, they're like,
[Amit Varma]: how can you do that?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, no, the brain normalizes everything.
[Amit Varma]: And I listen to all YouTube at 2x, by the way, except that you, you mentioned you listen
[Amit Varma]: to YouTube at higher, but there is no higher setting in my YouTube thing.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So essentially, I think, you know, knowledge management is something that I've paid a lot
[Guest]: of attention to.
[Guest]: So again, something that I've learned from one of my bosses at TCS, who's now the chief
[Guest]: technology officer.
[Guest]: And he was, he was big on what he called personal project management.
[Guest]: He said that people are great at, you know, following other people's project plans, but
[Guest]: they don't have a project plan of their own.
[Guest]: Do you know how much time you spend on reading?
[Guest]: Do you know how much time you spend on, you know, talking to others, right?
[Guest]: Do you have the right balance?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I think in a sense that I kind of got serious about efficiency of learning, if you will,
[Guest]: as an individual.
[Guest]: And I, you know, let me be absolutely clear here.
[Guest]: I don't recommend that other people simply blindly follow this at all.
[Guest]: It works for me.
[Guest]: And you know, it's, it's something I like doing.
[Guest]: I have multiple interests.
[Guest]: It's not for everyone, but in general.
[Guest]: So one of the things I do is that there's this Edgar Dale sort of pyramid of learning,
[Guest]: which is something that, you know, pedagogy teachers tend to use, right?
[Guest]: So if you read something, apparently you remember about 10% of it.
[Guest]: And if you watch a video, you remember 20% and if there's a live demonstration, you remember
[Guest]: 30%.
[Guest]: And ultimately go on to, if you teach someone else, you remember 90%.
[Guest]: So it's sort of, it's this sort of pyramid, and even within that, what you read on screen,
[Guest]: you retain a lot less than if you read on paper.
[Guest]: So there's this sort of big pyramid, right?
[Guest]: So I'm always sort of, I'm very wary of the fact that I don't want to only consume content.
[Guest]: So it is important that if I watch a video on say, some kind of, you know, illustrations
[Guest]: and digital illustrations, which I did, you know, because I drew a fair bit of the illustrations
[Guest]: in the book itself.
[Guest]: I had to learn it, right?
[Guest]: And so it's just watching hours and hours of videos not help.
[Guest]: So I'd have to sort of break it down into saying that, look, I'm going to pick the top
[Guest]: videos and then I'm going to basically in increasing order of difficulty, draw illustrations
[Guest]: that are more and more difficult.
[Guest]: So similar to how you learn music, you learn Papa Kehta Hit on the guitar as the first
[Guest]: song and then you kind of get into, you know, Pink Floyd or something more sophisticated
[Guest]: later, right?
[Guest]: So it's essentially the same.
[Guest]: So the second thing is around, I had a colleague who was visually challenged and he was one
[Guest]: of my colleagues who used to work on some of the applications that we used to build
[Guest]: some years back.
[Guest]: And he was working with us to test for accessibility, right?
[Guest]: So are these web applications accessible to people, you know, with visual disabilities
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And that's when I learned that how they actually use the web is use something called a screen
[Guest]: reader, right?
[Guest]: It's this thing that they wear, headphones that they wear, and literally it reads out
[Guest]: the HTML code on the page.
[Guest]: And so one, so you need really clean HTML code or it'll be a mess.
[Guest]: And two, so that the navigation and the menu and all of that is there.
[Guest]: And by the way, because you know, and they do not have any other distractions, it reads
[Guest]: it at six to seven X, the normal voice to me, it was just complete gibberish.
[Guest]: And he said, yeah, he was able to get it.
[Guest]: And he said something rather mind blowing.
[Guest]: He said that at six X, right, he can listen to an audio book faster than a sighted person
[Guest]: can read.
[Guest]: And above average sighted person can read, they said, look, if blind people can read
[Guest]: books faster than me, then clearly I think there's some improvements to be made.
[Guest]: I wasn't aiming for six X, but I said, okay, you know, let's start with two X.
[Guest]: Yours was one of the harder podcasts, because I think as Indians, we tend to speak faster.
[Guest]: The American podcast, you know, the NPR stuff, et cetera, is what I started, you know, increasing
[Guest]: the speed to 1.5 and slowly, gradually, you kind of get used to it.
[Guest]: In fact, when I came into the podcast, I realized that I've never heard your voice this slow
[Guest]: ever, right?
[Guest]: Because I've heard your voice for the last two years, and I've only heard it at three
[Guest]: X, right?
[Guest]: So that was a funny moment there.
[Guest]: So obviously I kind of, you know, therefore I realized that, you know, I could consume,
[Guest]: I could learn more, but I also have to do stuff.
[Guest]: And then I also have a, I have a very specific style of documenting or noting down things
[Guest]: in a way that I'll remember that, right?
[Guest]: I've tried all kinds of tools and ultimately just decided on, I mean, I've used a Mac,
[Guest]: so I just use notes there.
[Guest]: It's not great.
[Guest]: It can sometimes be buggy.
[Guest]: I've tried Evernote.
[Guest]: I've brought all those kinds of Google Keep and all of that, just settle down on, just
[Guest]: take down notes under different topic areas in terms of, you know, facts that I think
[Guest]: that I want to remember because they would be useful to sort of share when I talk to
[Guest]: someone, right?
[Guest]: Or learning journeys.
[Guest]: So if I find, so I use the Watch Later functionality really well.
[Guest]: So I say, hey, it's a one-hour lecture by, say, Daniel Kahneman, okay, I'm going to watch
[Guest]: it at some point of time, or David Graeber or someone else, right?
[Guest]: And so the other is also in a sense of figuring out the time of the day so that I'm not sitting
[Guest]: and doing this like all day, right?
[Guest]: So I need that balance.
[Guest]: So there's work and since the pandemic, so, you know, I have childcare duties, you know,
[Guest]: I have to spend, you know, two to three days of the week shepherding my son through his
[Guest]: online classes, otherwise he'll kind of get distracted and so on, and cooking and all
[Guest]: of that so that, you know, I time box it so that, you know, there's a, I have that constraint
[Guest]: as well, right?
[Guest]: And in a sense, there's a lot of synesthesia, I constantly kind of think about what, I hear
[Guest]: some music and try and see what it reminds me of visually and so on.
[Guest]: So I kind of note those things down because I have a terrible memory, right?
[Guest]: So now a lot of it, a lot of management is foundationally about writing stuff now.
[Guest]: So which is why it wasn't too hard to write this book, because I had like a ton of thoughts
[Amit Varma]: for the most part.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, that's completely fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I like these days, I'm using something I find pretty useful called Rome Research.
[Guest]: Have you tried it?
[Guest]: I was told.
[Guest]: One of my, one of the designers I worked with did recommend, I did see, I have not given
[Guest]: it a try yet, sort of mind mapping and not taking kind of tool or?
[Amit Varma]: Mind mapping is one part of it, but it does a couple of things.
[Amit Varma]: The first of which many other apps will also probably provide, the first of which is, you
[Amit Varma]: can have these nested little sections, which is a good way of organizing stuff.
[Amit Varma]: But the second is bi-directional linking, which is useful to me, because then it seems
[Amit Varma]: that over a period of time, as you input more and more, all of these connections form between
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: And I just find that a much bit like earlier, I used to take notes for my episodes on Microsoft
[Amit Varma]: Word.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And that's just a mess.
[Amit Varma]: And you use Scrivener while writing your book.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: How did that help?
[Guest]: That was actually fantastic.
[Guest]: So Scrivener is, before I set out to write, I was like, okay, you know, what tool should
[Guest]: I use?
[Guest]: I had used Scrivener in the past.
[Guest]: In fact, I used to use Scrivener when I was still actively writing my blog.
[Guest]: So I used to jot down these ideas, interrelated ideas, because there were several themes that
[Guest]: used to repeat across posts and so on.
[Guest]: So I used to kind of use Scrivener.
[Guest]: So essentially, I think what I liked about Scrivener is that it really focuses your thought
[Guest]: on structuring how you want to think about the narrative, as opposed to the visual.
[Guest]: One of my everlasting gripes with Microsoft Word or, you know, PowerPoint, right, it's
[Guest]: that it forces you, in a way, to constantly think about the visual representation of something
[Guest]: as opposed to purely the flow and the narrative, right, which is actually why academics tend
[Guest]: to use, you know, the tools of, it's called Latex and so on, right?
[Guest]: So it separates it out into two tools, one for writing content, which has no visual representation
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: You just get your white paper down, and then you do formatting and typesetting only at
[Guest]: the end, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense that I think, you know, Scrivener really sort of forces that mindset.
[Guest]: So it first allows you to lay down the layout of the book, you dump all your research, lay
[Guest]: down the chapters.
[Guest]: And I think my favorite part of the fact was the fact that it gamified the entire process
[Guest]: of saying that, hey, set a target.
[Guest]: You want to write 3,000 words a day, set it, right, and I'll tell you how you're doing.
[Guest]: And then it sort of kept me motivated to really just quickly get through to about 60,000 pages.
[Guest]: And I think it tremendously helped.
[Guest]: In fact, I had to do very little restructuring after I moved out of Scrivener into Word,
[Guest]: because that's how Penguin or any other publisher really works.
[Guest]: They work on Microsoft Word, but track changes and so on, right?
[Guest]: So that's how the industry works.
[Guest]: But I think we never really had to do anything major, you know, once I came out of Scrivener,
[Amit Varma]: I think it was fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: And just in terms of sort of getting your style down, like, again, a final sort of question
[Amit Varma]: in writing, you know, and you've also said in another interview that you've thought fairly
[Amit Varma]: deeply about science writing, especially from and you were talking about the pyramid earlier
[Amit Varma]: where you know, your 90% of absorption happens when you teach it to someone.
[Amit Varma]: I think the phrase you used in one of your earlier interviews was explain it to me like
[Unknown]: in five.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so how hard was it then to like, how hard was the process of writing, or, you
[Amit Varma]: know, just relentlessly practicing this kind of writing through the years, did it make
[Amit Varma]: it much easier than it would otherwise have been?
[Guest]: So there's, in a sense that my first drafts of some of the chapters, I did a fair amount
[Guest]: of rewriting.
[Guest]: And the reason for that was because I think the tone and the language and the style was
[Guest]: very similar to what you might find on my blog, right?
[Guest]: So I was always thinking about two things.
[Guest]: So there's, you know, there's, there's, there's a style of writing that I keep for the blog,
[Guest]: which is sort of humorous, snarky, a lot of pop culture references, sarcastic and so on.
[Guest]: And then there's, you know, the style of writing that I would often do either at work, when
[Guest]: I'm really putting down and explaining something to someone, and so on, or when I'm writing
[Guest]: a column, used to write columns for the Hindu and Indian Express back in the day, simple
[Guest]: science and technology columns.
[Guest]: And clearly, I think the editor then and there said that, you know, don't show off your humor
[Guest]: here, right?
[Guest]: If you're aiming to educate, you know, focus on that, throw in the odd joke, but the explaining
[Guest]: part has to be the important part.
[Guest]: And so in a sense, I ended up rewriting the first couple of chapters, because I felt that
[Guest]: it was more in my blog style, it was more snarky, more jokes.
[Guest]: And then my editor also was like, over time, as I started rewriting, and my inspiration
[Guest]: was largely Bill Bryson, right?
[Guest]: Bill Bryson, in my opinion, is one of the absolute best writers of nonfiction, purely
[Guest]: for a couple of things.
[Guest]: One is how he's able to explain complex scientific ideas to people who may not have a science
[Guest]: background.
[Guest]: That's number one.
[Guest]: And yet he does it with a tremendous amount of warmth and humor, in just the right amount,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: In a way that it doesn't get in the way of, you're not trying to show off your humor,
[Guest]: I mean, so I, you know, in a way that, you know, if I, if I look and read back some of
[Guest]: my blog posts from, say, 2008 or 2009, it now feels like I was trying to show off that
[Guest]: I was funny, rather than it didn't come naturally, right?
[Guest]: So I was, so in a sense that I did a first couple of chapters, and then in reality, because
[Guest]: of my, you know, decade-long or multi-decades-long sort of experience of literally breaking,
[Guest]: understanding everything only by first principles, it actually came easier.
[Guest]: So I ended up being far more productive.
[Guest]: I didn't have to stop to think, okay, what joke can I make here, right?
[Guest]: It just came naturally in the sense of, you know what, it's easier for me to explain thermodynamics
[Guest]: to you without calculus, explained like M5, than with calculus, which, which implies that
[Guest]: I need to remember some of those things I remember at a higher level, right?
[Guest]: I would rather just go right down to the fact that, look, you know, there's, there's heat,
[Guest]: there's, there's electrons and these particles, they're colliding with each other, they transfer
[Guest]: heat and they transfer energy and so on.
[Guest]: That's a far more intuitive way, if you will.
[Guest]: And I think some of my inspirations were obviously, you know, people like Feynman and others who
[Guest]: really had a way of explaining things without expecting that you had a science degree, right?
[Amit Varma]: So I think that was the general style.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I'm glad you didn't cut all the humor out because, you know, the book has
[Amit Varma]: these delightful light touches throughout and just to give the listeners a taste of
[Amit Varma]: that, I'm going to read out a couple of lines, which I absolutely love.
[Amit Varma]: And here Ashok writes, quote, learning to cook by reading recipes is like trying to
[Amit Varma]: learn chemistry by only reading equations or the biographies of chemists.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine walking into a chemistry lab and finding an instruction textbook that says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: bring to a gentle simmer the exotic melange of oxalic acid and the righteous colors of
[Amit Varma]: potassium peranganate, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: You would probably respond with, quote, can we do a little easy on the adjectives and
[Amit Varma]: stick to explaining how and why things work, stop quote, which is almost like, I think,
[Amit Varma]: a representative summary of the entire book.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't.
[Amit Varma]: So at what point did you actually then start thinking that, like, was there a moment where
[Amit Varma]: you felt that there should be a book like this and there isn't?
[Amit Varma]: So why don't I write it?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it rather people coming to you and saying, hey, you write so wonderfully about
[Amit Varma]: food, why don't you do it?
[Guest]: How did the book kind of take concrete shape?
[Guest]: Funnily enough, I sent Penguin two proposals.
[Guest]: So you know, Mansi Subramaniam has been sort of pursuing me for a while, right?
[Guest]: So I was, I was busy at work, I somehow kind of didn't get into the frame of mind to say
[Guest]: commit to this and say, let me do this, right.
[Guest]: And actually, to be honest, let's say three or four years back, I still had this sort
[Guest]: of weird post digital notion that books are dead and you know, self publishing and I'm
[Guest]: not a fan of how the publishing industry treats artists, you know, authors and so on.
[Guest]: So I had this idea that if at all I do something, I'll do something very unique, it'd be an
[Guest]: interactive book, it'll be somewhere halfway between a book and a video game.
[Guest]: So those are the kinds of crazy ideas that I had.
[Guest]: I mean, not that I had time to actually, you know, put it down and so on.
[Guest]: Obviously, I mean, those youthful ideas gave way to the fact that ultimately realized that
[Guest]: look at the end of the day, books are books, books have been around, books have been the
[Guest]: predominant preeminent form of transferring knowledge for mankind.
[Guest]: I mean, at least widely for the last 500, 600 years, but you know, since the dawn of
[Guest]: you know, writing and so on, right.
[Guest]: So clearly, I think my first proposal was not for the food science book.
[Guest]: It was actually an afterthought.
[Guest]: So she basically said, send me some ideas, and I'll tell you which ones which I think
[Guest]: might work, right.
[Guest]: So my first proposal was a speculative science fiction, sort of set in India, you know, six
[Guest]: or seven stories whose synopsis I had already written a while back.
[Guest]: So I kind of said, hey, sort of speculative fiction, near future science fiction, addressing
[Guest]: a lot of these very typical Indian themes about how caste might intersect with sci fi
[Guest]: themes and so on, right, those kinds of things, right.
[Guest]: And I wrote that.
[Guest]: And then after that, as an afterthought, she said, yes, I sent me a nonfiction one also,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I said, Okay, what do I write in nonfiction?
[Guest]: You know, what, what are my areas of expertise, if you write, I didn't want to write about
[Guest]: software or anything like that.
[Guest]: So I said, Okay, I mean, the next I could either write about music, which, which I've
[Guest]: always found is very hard to write about.
[Guest]: Music is, is, you know, Tim Krishna is a fantastic writer, which is why I enjoy it.
[Guest]: Because I think he's, he's not only talking about the music, right?
[Guest]: He's also talking about the social and the cultural and the wider historical aspects
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: And I said, No, I don't have that background.
[Guest]: I mean, I can't write about music in the same way he does, right?
[Guest]: So I said, you know, hey, you know what, I let me combine two of my other favorite passions,
[Guest]: science writing and cooking and let me put together a, that was the time when I had bought,
[Guest]: you know, Kenji Lopez's Food Lab and, you know, the Lord of the Kitchen, I think Harold
[Guest]: McGee and so on.
[Guest]: And I was so I was blown away by the fact that they had really reduced a lot of these
[Guest]: cooking principles into very simple, explain like in five sort of explanations.
[Guest]: And I said, Okay, fine, you know what, I'm going to do this.
[Guest]: And I quickly put together a proposal as an afterthought.
[Guest]: And, and she got back immediately said, I want the food book, we'll do the fiction later.
[Guest]: So so that that's how the whole thing actually kind of started.
[Amit Varma]: I'd love to read the fiction also as well.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, so kindly get down to it at some point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And you've started this book about this really charming story about how you ask your grandmother
[Amit Varma]: for a recipe, and she gives you the recipe.
[Amit Varma]: And then she says, there's one ingredient, I kind of forgot to tell you about, and that
[Amit Varma]: is patience, you know, which is both deeply true and also indicative of the way, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's almost this kind of mystical aura about this art of cooking that later in the
[Amit Varma]: book, you're right, quote, Indian cooking in particular is supposed to be an art wrapped
[Amit Varma]: in oriental mystique, soaked in exotic history and deep fried in tradition and culture.
[Amit Varma]: Western food is supposed to be scientific and bland, while Indian cooking, we are told
[Amit Varma]: is all about tradition and flavor, stop code.
[Amit Varma]: So what was your process of kind of, like, you know, I imagine that you are, again, as
[Amit Varma]: in music, someone who's first exposure to food would be Indian food, but then you you're
[Amit Varma]: eating everything else.
[Amit Varma]: You know, can you tell me about, like, is there an aha moment where you start thinking
[Amit Varma]: about food in a different way?
[Amit Varma]: Or when do you sort of start taking that step back and looking at these first principles
[Amit Varma]: and looking at it in a meta way and deciding that you need to figure this out?
[Guest]: I think so for me, that moment, obviously, first is it has to be the fact that exposure
[Guest]: to other kinds of cooking, clearly one, I mean, I, I grew up in a strictly vegetarian
[Guest]: no garlic household.
[Guest]: But my father and my grandmother were like, you know, make sure that you eat everything
[Guest]: outside so that, you know, you don't suffer by being too restrictive, right?
[Guest]: And so obviously, by exposure to food outside, my home was pretty much during my high school
[Guest]: and college days, eating at Kareem's, you know, kebabs and so on.
[Guest]: So that was obviously the first exposure to food outside.
[Guest]: And obviously the realization that so there are styles of cooking that can actually bring
[Guest]: about so many other different kinds of flavors beyond just the narrow confines of cuisine
[Guest]: at home.
[Guest]: And that's fascinatingly enough.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And I often tell this to people that Indian vegetarian cooking is not an afterthought.
[Guest]: It's not like meat dishes minus meat.
[Guest]: It is an entirely original, ultra rich cuisine that has evolved over thousands of years in
[Guest]: really extracting flavors without the advantages of the umami advantages of meat from vegetables
[Guest]: and all these ingredients.
[Guest]: So it's by no means, you know, the flavor profile of food at home was, was less.
[Guest]: My mother was a fantastic cook and as well as my grandmother, I mean, it was a fantastic
[Guest]: cook again.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So one was obviously exposure to food outside.
[Guest]: And then I lived seven years in the US and then that obviously opened up, you know, the,
[Guest]: uh, a lot more avenues and, you know, had an opportunity to obviously eat Thai food
[Guest]: and Chinese food and Mexican food and a lot other, you know, and pizza whenever I wanted
[Guest]: it and so on.
[Guest]: Um, and, and share, uh, and also over time, the realization that trouble that my grandmother
[Guest]: was having writing down recipe, it kind of stayed with me for a while.
[Guest]: She was finding it hard to kind of say how much exactly you said, well, I just, you know,
[Guest]: I just use a sense of, you know, just salt to taste, you know, or, uh, so a lot of the,
[Guest]: the Tamil expressions for, of ingredient sizes are not in spoons because people didn't have
[Guest]: spoons.
[Guest]: So they're all based on the configuration of your fingers, right?
[Guest]: Well, paddy is actually sort of your, what you can hold in your fist, right?
[Guest]: Um, and then other words to describe what you can hold in two fingers, other, you can
[Guest]: hold a small pinch and so on.
[Guest]: So there's very specific, there's a language that kind of describes how much you put based
[Guest]: on that, and she would essentially use that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And I realized one that if, if she's able to cook without this kind of broad adherence
[Guest]: to authenticity or recipe and so on, maybe there's nothing to that, right?
[Guest]: So the fact that all food writing is just all recipes, and if you read it, you kind
[Guest]: of get a sense that if you put more than that, one fourth teaspoon of the powder, it will
[Guest]: taste different is fallacious, but a lot of beginners think it is important that a lot
[Guest]: of beginners think that the sequence is important and so on.
[Guest]: So I think the aha moment, I think happened over a period of time when I essentially realized
[Guest]: that a lot of Indian cooking and I contrasted to specifically baking, which is a lot more
[Guest]: precise.
[Guest]: And if you don't get the proportions, right, you know, and there's no undo button for a
[Guest]: cake or a bread, a lot of Indian cooking is in a sense that you, you can fix stuff, right?
[Guest]: You can get to the same kind of rich flavor in a million different ways with different
[Guest]: ingredients where you can replace a ton of things, right?
[Guest]: And it'll still be fine.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And so, and the recognition that no two homes have the same recipe for a biryani or the
[Guest]: same recipe for a sambar, and yet people are still crazy about this is the authentic, oh,
[Guest]: you add, somebody actually said to me that you add ginger and rasam, we never add ginger
[Guest]: and rasam.
[Guest]: I said, that's fine.
[Guest]: What's wrong with adding ginger and rasam?
[Guest]: I mean, many people do.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: In my home, for example, my mother would not add garlic in rasam, right?
[Guest]: And yet in Tamil Nadu, garlic and rasam is quintessential.
[Guest]: I mean, that's really what really gives out that kind of taste and so on.
[Guest]: So therefore the realization that a lot of these recipes are not quite capturing the
[Guest]: kind of better knowledge that is actually useful.
[Guest]: They are kind of painting a picture of authenticity and specificity where none existed.
[Guest]: And so, which is why I said, do you know what?
[Guest]: I think there's a way to step back and think, okay, can I instead think of a generic way
[Guest]: of making rice, a generic way of making a gravy, a generic way of making a cooking meat
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So that felt like a far more useful thing to really aspire.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, I had done an episode ages back with Vikram Doctor about Indian food.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the things I've realized by reading Vikram's columns in your book also
[Amit Varma]: has a lot of that is that pretty much everything we cook with came from outside, whether it
[Amit Varma]: is a tomato or the chilies or the potatoes or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So what even is authentic?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and that seems to be a pet peeve of yours, because you've come back to it a
[Amit Varma]: couple of times in your book about this snobbery about authenticness.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your time as a cook.
[Amit Varma]: Because at one point in your book, you write, quote, cooking is essentially chemical engineering
[Amit Varma]: in a home laboratory, known as a kitchen with an optional lab coat, known as an apron, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And elsewhere, you speak about the importance of if you want to learn how to cook of doing
[Amit Varma]: A-B testing, where you cook a particular thing one way, and then you cook it another way.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes, you know, in the same session, you divide it into two.
[Amit Varma]: And you also kind of pointed out that how when a recipe talks about, you know, how many
[Amit Varma]: whistles there should be in a pressure cooker, that's basically nonsense, because it depends
[Amit Varma]: on what kind of gas you're cooking with, and the whistles will be differently spaced in,
[Amit Varma]: say, an induction cooker and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So as a cook, were you someone who, perhaps when you started going abroad, just started
[Amit Varma]: it in a utilitarian way of like, we just fix something for myself, so I can have something
[Amit Varma]: hot now?
[Amit Varma]: Or did you then get curious, and were you always kind of experimenting around and doing
[Amit Varma]: A-B testing with every meal?
[Guest]: Well, no.
[Guest]: So I think the A-B testing part probably started a little bit later.
[Guest]: I mean, in the early days, it was just, just functional as utilitarian, as you said, I
[Guest]: just wanted to make sure that I just eating, you know, outside or eating pizza, or burgers
[Guest]: every day in the US was not going to be a healthy lifestyle.
[Guest]: So and by the way, those are designed to be so addictive, that it's incredible.
[Guest]: I mean, it is really hard to not, you know, eat pizza every day or want to eat pizza.
[Guest]: So it started out that way.
[Guest]: And obviously, it also started out and remember that this was the year, you know, 2000-2001.
[Guest]: The way I lived in Texas, there was just one Indian grocery store, which was tremendously
[Guest]: expensive and you wouldn't get all the ingredients that you needed, particularly, you wouldn't
[Guest]: get South Indian ingredients, right?
[Guest]: So shop was run by a Punjabi gentleman and you know, and he would get curry leaves once
[Guest]: in like two months, and he would charge like some $8 for this tiny dried a bit of curry
[Guest]: leaves.
[Guest]: And I kind of, you know, got to thinking about, look, I need to be able to replace these ingredients.
[Guest]: It's obvious that if someone says that I cannot make sambar, because I don't have this dal
[Guest]: or I cannot make sambar because I don't have curry leaves, or if I don't have a specific
[Guest]: ingredient.
[Guest]: So clearly, I think it started out that way, which over time, essentially became this wider
[Guest]: principle that look in the best recipe for your dish is, is what you make with the ingredients
[Guest]: you have on a given day.
[Guest]: It's the technique that matters.
[Guest]: It's to an extent, maybe there are some dominant ingredients, I do agree that the flavor of
[Guest]: curry leaf is very hard to replicate, although, you know, I subsequently did discover that
[Guest]: if you have grated lime zest and basil, and Italian basil, you can kind of approximate
[Guest]: some of the flavor profile of a curry leaf and so on.
[Guest]: But yeah, I mean, that's like much later.
[Guest]: So in a sense, I think a lot of this was started out utilitarian, and then later reached a
[Guest]: point where I would say about a decade or so ago, I started writing down every day what
[Guest]: I was cooking, right?
[Guest]: So broadly, nothing too much, I would just say, hey, you know, I made this, and just
[Guest]: note down the things that I kind of observed, like for instance, for example, not entirely
[Guest]: not necessarily the entire recipe, right?
[Guest]: So if I'm making chapati, I would say, look, I used about 80% water, and it turned out
[Guest]: to be quite dry.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So the next day, therefore, you know, the next time I would try 90% and say, hey, it's
[Guest]: turned out to be slightly better.
[Guest]: So same thing with dal and so on.
[Guest]: And then I would try replacements, right?
[Guest]: Like for example, if you don't have tamarind, you can use vinegar, I mean, at the end of
[Guest]: the day, it's an acid.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And vinegar is actually fantastic.
[Guest]: And in fact, coconut vinegar and other vinegars are actually fantastically, you know, very
[Guest]: flavorful.
[Guest]: You can actually make a rasam with vinegar if you don't have tamarind, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense that also over this time, I started documenting replacements, right, saying
[Guest]: that if you don't have this, you can obviously use this at the end of the day, this is the
[Guest]: function it plays.
[Guest]: So, you know, you can do it, right?
[Guest]: You don't have curd to marinate your meat, no worries, marination does very little.
[Guest]: Just use your lime juice and spices and then focus on brining the meat, which adds a lot
[Guest]: more flavor.
[Guest]: And that way, you know, you can focus.
[Guest]: So it was essentially a lot of daily documentation.
[Guest]: I kind of also talk about it in the methodology section saying that, look, I don't want people
[Guest]: to read this book and go, oh, this is the exact way to cook rice.
[Guest]: And this is the absolute precise, if I do this exactly in 10 minutes, it will happen.
[Guest]: Remember that, you know, it's as much as I say, it's a laboratory, it's not, right?
[Guest]: A laboratory has standardized conditions.
[Guest]: They use like standardized equipment, standardized conditions, standardized temperature.
[Guest]: It things that work for me in a Chennai climate, you know, 30 Celsius indoor, humid all through
[Guest]: the year will work very differently in other climates and with other ingredients and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: So, but it's better you learn kind of like the method of how you test for different ingredients
[Guest]: on different days, do that AB testing, and then figure out, okay, this is the way I like
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And then sort of, you know, tick mark.
[Amit Varma]: So as I said, it's, it's a lot of data.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's completely fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And even what you just said about, you know, one of the myths that you busted in the book
[Amit Varma]: is that marination is important and actually, you know, nothing seeps through the meat and
[Amit Varma]: gives it flavor, even if you keep it for 24 hours and you pointed out why grinding is
[Amit Varma]: much more effective and what's more important is you pointed it out in chemical terms.
[Amit Varma]: So one can imagine the dance of elements and protons and all of that and come to the taste
[Amit Varma]: that one comes to, let's kind of start talking about the book and I found the first chapter
[Amit Varma]: very fascinating because, and it seemed to me that it must have been kind of the toughest
[Amit Varma]: to write because, you know, that's where there is so much science happening.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's all about energy and heat and conduction and convection.
[Amit Varma]: Then you talk about the four major chemical reactions and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about, you know, why you decided to start with this subject in your first chapter
[Amit Varma]: to begin with and how you tackled the difficulties that arose while you were writing about it.
[Guest]: I would say about 30% of the time that I took to write the book was, went to the, went to
[Guest]: the first chapter.
[Guest]: The other ones were relatively simpler because they were focused on very specific things.
[Guest]: And the first chapter was important because it was, I had to kind of decide how far back
[Guest]: do I go in terms of the basics, right?
[Guest]: You know, and at the same time, I didn't want it to be gratuitous just to show that I understood
[Guest]: thermodynamics, right?
[Guest]: The usefulness of understanding conduction and convection in the kitchen is only in the
[Guest]: context of you understanding how a stainless steel pan works differently from a cast iron
[Guest]: works differently from an aluminum or something else, right?
[Guest]: And knowing that is useful because you, it's less likely that you'll burn your food, right?
[Guest]: It's less likely that you'll be able to estimate how much time to cook something.
[Guest]: So again, part of the problem is that recipes will tell you cook for eight minutes or whatever
[Guest]: it is.
[Guest]: They don't necessarily tell you exactly at what levels of heat and in what material and
[Guest]: all of these, all of these actually impact, right?
[Guest]: So one, I knew that I wanted to talk about basics of materials and basics of heat transfer,
[Guest]: just so people know that in a sense, I really wanted to kind of highlight to people that
[Guest]: if there's one skill worth mastering to make you a better cook, forget all the rest of
[Guest]: the stuff.
[Guest]: It's master temperature.
[Guest]: Get a good sense of what happens when, and trust me, you'll become a better cook without
[Guest]: even learning anything else, right?
[Guest]: Just understand when eggs cook, when meat cooks, when vegetables cook, starches cook,
[Guest]: when water boils, when Bayard reaction happens, and when deep frying happens, and that's,
[Guest]: that's really it, right?
[Guest]: And if you understand this and you can see visually, because I don't expect everyone
[Guest]: to have a thermometer, although I recommend that you buy a thermometer, but it's not necessary.
[Guest]: You can kind of see, you know, when starch gelatinizes, it kind of becomes softer and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: When meat, proteins denature, they become hard, right?
[Guest]: Which is why chicken is so easily overcooked all the time, right?
[Guest]: And so that's the reason why I sequenced the first chapter, roughly the order of what I
[Guest]: think was the most important skills you needed in the context of the Indian kitchen.
[Guest]: So, which is why it starts with heat and materials and pressure cooking, and then goes into rice,
[Guest]: because, you know, more people eat, you know, rice is the single most consumed grain, a
[Guest]: staple food in the Indian subcontinent.
[Guest]: So rice, and then wheat, and then, you know, vegetables, and then meat and eggs and fat,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Because these are things you're going to encounter almost every other day, right?
[Guest]: So you kind of get those basics, right?
[Guest]: And then, of course, I can then talk to you about spices and acids and, and browning and
[Guest]: all the other fancy umami and all the other things much.
[Guest]: So that's how I kind of sequenced the first chapter.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, it was, it was quite fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you, you know, later in the book, I was struck by this pithy quote,
[Amit Varma]: cooking is a strategic application of heat to transform an ingredient into a narrow range
[Amit Varma]: of acceptable flavors, and more importantly, textures, stop quote, and I was struck here
[Amit Varma]: by the phrase acceptable flavors.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the things that again, where you've taken that sort of meta step
[Amit Varma]: back and you looked at is that we tend to assume that, you know, there is something
[Amit Varma]: absolute in terms of judgment about x tasting good and y tasting bad and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the truth is that all of these are kind of contingent on the circumstances in which
[Amit Varma]: we evolved.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, for example, like you've pointed out that we don't like, you know, alkaline
[Amit Varma]: sort of tastes and substances, whereas it's the other way around with acidic and there
[Amit Varma]: is an evolutionary reason for why we are the way we are.
[Amit Varma]: So there's no sort of, we are basically catering to the way that we are wired in terms of taste.
[Amit Varma]: Whenever we kind of make food, you want to talk a little bit about this, because this
[Amit Varma]: is sort of a very interesting aspect to me, because then what it implies is that figuring
[Amit Varma]: out food begins with figuring out human beings, who we are and how, you know, how we evolve
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I think, you know, one of my all time favorite books is this book called Neuro Gastronomy.
[Guest]: In fact, I read it much after I wrote the book, but I was just obviously struck by,
[Guest]: because I'd read a lot of the kind of white papers that he cites in the book when I did
[Guest]: the research for my book.
[Guest]: But clearly, when I read the book, I think it kind of, you know, it's a fantastic book.
[Guest]: So essentially, he talks about how we perceive flavor and it is, there are just so many layers,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So for starters, the fact that flavor is 80% smell, it's only 20% taste, you know, from
[Guest]: a pure contribution standpoint, and you can only taste five things, right?
[Guest]: You know, salt, sweet, bitter, sour, and umami.
[Guest]: And then, but you can taste, you can smell apparently close to 10,000 different odors,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And so your olfactory cortex plays a tremendous role in how you combine both taste and smell,
[Guest]: So for example, something like a cardamom actually tastes bitter.
[Guest]: So if you have a cold, if you have a bad cold, right, but you can't smell it, cardamom will
[Guest]: just taste bitter.
[Guest]: But it's a combination of the taste, the mouthfeel, and the aroma that really sort of makes the
[Guest]: whole thing.
[Guest]: So things like, say, how saltiness and sweetness amplify other tastes, right?
[Guest]: So if you actually have cardamom with a pinch of salt or a pinch of sugar, it'll taste,
[Guest]: it'll smell more cardamom-y, right?
[Guest]: So there's a tremendous one, a lot of the tasting actually happens in your brain.
[Guest]: So that's the fun part, right?
[Guest]: And the amazing thing is that it's one of those weird senses where all the experience
[Guest]: is happening in your brain, right?
[Guest]: And with sensors mostly in your nose, but the brain needs to fool you into thinking
[Guest]: that it's all happening in your mouth, because otherwise it'd be very odd, right?
[Guest]: Because it's one of those very bizarre senses.
[Guest]: So when you touch something, you know, it's your hand that is touching it.
[Guest]: And you know, so that's how other senses work.
[Guest]: You see it, you see it with your eyes, right?
[Guest]: So it's not, your brain doesn't perceive that you're seeing it with the back of your head
[Guest]: or something.
[Guest]: But taste is bizarre.
[Guest]: Taste is bizarre, flavor is bizarre, because you eat with your mouth, and when you break
[Guest]: down these molecules, they go through the back of your mouth into the retronasal sort
[Guest]: of olfaction, as it's called, because most of the taste of food comes from not you smelling
[Guest]: inside, but from the molecules actually going from behind your mouth up to those same receptors.
[Guest]: And then the brain has to combine taste, this mouthfeel, and everything else, and give you
[Guest]: the illusion that all of it's happening in your mouth.
[Guest]: So it's a very, so one, it's very, very individual.
[Guest]: There are gender variations.
[Guest]: Women have more olfactory receptors.
[Guest]: Women have higher density of taste buds on average.
[Guest]: Again, there are exceptions, but on average, right?
[Guest]: There are sometimes cultural variations, which also account for things like salt, for example.
[Guest]: So one of the common questions that beginner cooks have is, how do I estimate salt?
[Guest]: It's very hard, because salt is one of the things that you cannot undo, right?
[Guest]: All those tricks that they tell you that, you know, hey, if I've over-salted something,
[Guest]: other than add water, more water, you can't actually fix it, right?
[Guest]: So the amount of salt is always a tricky thing, right?
[Guest]: But Western food scientists have actually figured out that for American tastes, between
[Guest]: one and 1.5% by weight of the food is a good place to start for precision, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if you, but you're not going to weigh everything in your kitchen all the time.
[Guest]: But then again, if you really think about it, right, most of the weight of everything
[Guest]: in your cooking pan is the weight of water.
[Guest]: Water is the heaviest thing, and it's most of food is water, okay?
[Guest]: And so therefore, if you have a mental heuristic of being able to estimate volume and therefore
[Guest]: weight of water, you can actually get very, very good at estimating salt and things like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: If you kind of know that, you know, hey, this, by the way, this cup is 200 ml, that's 200
[Guest]: grams of water, because water's density is one, right?
[Guest]: Likewise, you know, if you have a pot that has about, say, half a liter of water, then
[Guest]: you know a gravy that's about three-fourths is about, say, 350 grams of water.
[Guest]: Even if it's a dish or sambar, you can literally just assume that it's mostly just the weight
[Guest]: of water, right?
[Guest]: So therefore, you can actually, therefore, use that kind of mental heuristic to estimate
[Guest]: salt and so on, and this varies by culture, by the way, right?
[Guest]: So Indians clearly like food a lot more saltier, and we are also okay with food that is a lot
[Guest]: hotter, right, in terms of chilies.
[Guest]: Other people may not have that sensitivity, and likewise, a lot of the aroma, because
[Guest]: it's related to nostalgia and so on, some of these things are very hard to fix.
[Guest]: Like, for example, a lot of Indians find it very tough to deal with the smell of, say,
[Guest]: fish sauce in Southeast Asia, or the smell of certain kinds of meat in China and so on,
[Guest]: because a lot of those smells, let me take another example, right?
[Guest]: So you take dried fish, which is a quintessential smell in Chennai, if you're near the seacoast
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Dried, tiny fish are essentially the only fish that the fisher folk can afford, right?
[Guest]: Because the larger fish tend to be sold to the rich people.
[Guest]: The larger, less tastier, largely useless fish, they get the umami bomb, tiny, you know,
[Guest]: the dried fish and so on, that one of those sulfurous molecules in fish can be detected
[Guest]: in like one molecule in a quadrillion.
[Guest]: I mean, that's how sensitive we are, right?
[Guest]: But if you are someone from the seaside, you're used to eating fish all the time, your sense
[Guest]: of detecting that is going to be at a much weaker level, in the sense that you'll need
[Guest]: much, much more for you to be able to detect.
[Guest]: But people who don't eat fish can smell it from a mile away, and they don't like it,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So there's such a tremendous sort of individual variation, your own state of mind itself.
[Guest]: I think, you know, people taste food differently when they're stressed, people taste food differently,
[Guest]: depending on their moods and many other things.
[Guest]: And now, you know, famously, with COVID, you can also get anosmia, which is that you lose
[Guest]: the ability to smell for a long time.
[Guest]: In fact, it has actually affected the careers of some chefs who have taken months to get
[Guest]: their sense of smell back and they can't cook without their sense of smell and so on.
[Guest]: So in a sense that this is such a, the reason I say that this is a, is that acceptable is
[Guest]: because it is acceptable to you as an individual.
[Guest]: And why is it acceptable to you for many reasons, history, nostalgia, your own making, your
[Guest]: gender, your conditioning, your culture, a ton of other things, right?
[Guest]: So that's what, so some people will like brinjal really mashed up and some people find it very
[Guest]: slimy and they need it crunchier and some people will find that very raw, right?
[Guest]: It's just that there's such a tremendous variation individually that it's, it's just completely
[Guest]: pointless being possessive about food in general, because all you're ultimately saying is that
[Guest]: I like this food in a very specific taste that I experienced 30 years ago and every
[Guest]: other way it tastes is invalid.
[Guest]: I mean, that's essentially what you're saying, which is what is silly.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I think humans in some respect must be wired to think of their preferences
[Amit Varma]: as being universal in the sense of I like this, this must be good.
[Amit Varma]: If I think this, this must be right.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so many things to unpack here.
[Amit Varma]: One is you're talking about, you know, the sense of smell being so important.
[Amit Varma]: I was just chatting with a friend of mine who's recovered from COVID and he had lost
[Amit Varma]: his sense of smell.
[Amit Varma]: And he offered to, I think, sent me some prawn balchao that his mom had made.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, aren't you having some?
[Amit Varma]: And he said, yeah, I can't taste anything right now.
[Amit Varma]: So that kind of drives it home.
[Amit Varma]: For the sake of my listeners, I'll just give a quick elaboration on the kind of scientific
[Amit Varma]: explanation that can form TIL moments in your book.
[Amit Varma]: Like when he was speaking about salt, you spoke about how 0.4% of our saliva is salt.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore anything less than that, it'll seem bland to us that there is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, beyond that, Indians can go to 1.5%.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in the West, it'll largely be around the 1% mark.
[Amit Varma]: You also busted that myth that if there is too much salt, put some potato or rice.
[Amit Varma]: And what Ashok points out in his book is that no, all that will do is absorb the gravy.
[Amit Varma]: It does nothing about, you know, the essential saltiness.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sort of also struck by sort of, you know, one of the delightful things about your
[Amit Varma]: first chapter, which, you know, I love things which make me look at what is otherwise mundane
[Amit Varma]: and see it as spectacular.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what you do with water in the first chapter where I was just filled with a sense
[Amit Varma]: of awe at what, you know, what is this freakish thing that we drink every day.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about why it is so remarkable.
[Guest]: I mean, this was something that actually sort of, it's inspired by something that I heard
[Guest]: Carl Sagan say many years ago, I think in the original Cosmos that used to air on Doordarshan,
[Guest]: which I used to watch, you know, religiously every Sunday morning.
[Guest]: And it stayed with me.
[Guest]: He stayed with me when he basically said that water is just magical, right?
[Guest]: There is no reason for water to behave the way it does.
[Guest]: And if it didn't behave the way it does, there would be no life, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we are mostly water, what we eat is mostly water, our planet is mostly water,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: In fact, so much so that even, you know, people who search for extraterrestrial life, there
[Guest]: is, it's not like they open their minds and say, let's look for hydrogen sulfide based
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: No, for the most part, it has to be carbon based and it has to be water based.
[Guest]: So therefore, the variety of life per se cannot be beyond the fact that it's carbon based
[Guest]: and it is water based because both of these are just magical in their own way, right?
[Guest]: And water particularly, right?
[Guest]: So you think about oxygen is a smaller atom than sulfur, which is a heavier atom.
[Guest]: In general, if you look at the periodic table, larger atoms in general, you know, tend to
[Guest]: be solids and smaller atoms tend to be gases, broad rule, but there are exceptions and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So you would expect that H2O would also be a gas like H2S, which is just right below,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And sulfur is also like oxygen, but hydrogen sulfide is a gas and water alone, because
[Guest]: if just the way is just a, it's one of those, you know, Stephen Hawking's, you know, anthropic
[Guest]: principles, you know, it's like, if it was any different, we wouldn't be here to talk
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: So there is no debating why it's just the way it is, right?
[Guest]: It's just that liquid water's ability to form bonds outside of just its own hydrogen and
[Guest]: oxygen and so on, gives it the property where it is actually denser than ice, which is remarkable
[Guest]: because all solids tend to be denser than liquids, but water alone is denser than its
[Guest]: solid form, right?
[Guest]: And then the fact that it can keep forming these bonds also means that it can form these
[Guest]: bonds with the proteins and other things that, that make up our body, which is how the spectacular
[Guest]: diversity of all our biochemistry literally comes from water being involved in every single
[Guest]: reaction, every protein synthesis, everything that keeps you alive, right?
[Guest]: There is water involved in those reactions without water not happening, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, it is essentially that, right?
[Guest]: And in fact, the fact that we use it in cooking, right, is in a bizarre way, also a slightly
[Guest]: limiting thing, and I'll tell you why, right?
[Guest]: Water boils at 100, but the tastiest flavors and food come after 110 Celsius, which is
[Guest]: where Maillard reaction happens.
[Guest]: So you can't have Maillard reaction as long as water is around, right?
[Guest]: So a lot of cooking is about getting that balance right, right?
[Guest]: So if it, you can't have it all dry without water either, but at the same time, so which
[Guest]: is why restaurants and so on, almost always deep fry or saut ingredients separately,
[Guest]: brown it, and then add it to the gravy, which is mostly water, because once you add it to
[Guest]: the gravy, it will never get the brown color.
[Guest]: So you do it ahead of time.
[Guest]: At home, you know, you normally won't do that.
[Guest]: You will kind of, you're making them aloo gobi, you're going to put the aloo and the
[Guest]: gobi and put the gravy and kind of cook it.
[Guest]: It's not going to taste like the restaurant one, because the restaurant one will involve
[Guest]: that being deep fried in oil, which is sort of brings me to another aha moment, which
[Guest]: I kind of realized later, which is that oil in the context of frying plays the same role
[Guest]: that water does.
[Guest]: And this seems odd.
[Guest]: The only difference is that what water does is that it transfers heat evenly to your food.
[Guest]: It's a medium for convection, it's for heat transfer, right?
[Guest]: Because if you put something directly on a pan, only the bottom is going to get hot and
[Guest]: the top won't get cooked and all of that.
[Guest]: Whereas if it's in water, water has this property where it will all get to the same temperature
[Guest]: and it will transfer heat to your food evenly, right?
[Guest]: So that's the reason we use water in cooking.
[Guest]: We use oil for exactly the same reason, because you want to transfer heat, but at 170 Celsius,
[Guest]: which is when it browns, right?
[Guest]: So literally fats play the role of water, except at a higher temperature.
[Guest]: Fats don't chemically react with the food at all.
[Guest]: So you think they do, they don't, right?
[Guest]: So it's the amino acids and sugars that react.
[Guest]: Fat goes in directly.
[Guest]: They get broken down only by our intestine and nowhere else.
[Guest]: I mean, they start breaking down in your mouth.
[Guest]: And because we're mostly water and fats don't mix with water, your body turns it into a
[Guest]: mayonnaise, basically.
[Guest]: I mean, imagine that picture, right?
[Guest]: So your liver literally uses bile to emulsify all the fat that you eat.
[Guest]: So what's actually going down through is like an emulsion.
[Guest]: It's like mayonnaise, where it's ultimately broken down only your small intestine and
[Guest]: the fats are absorbed, right?
[Guest]: And the water as well.
[Guest]: So water for me has always been this, if you can understand water, if you can understand
[Guest]: one, what contains, most things contain water, right?
[Guest]: Cucumber, for instance, cucumber is 95% water.
[Guest]: Cucumber contains more water than some really hard water that comes straight out of your
[Guest]: tap, which is probably has tons of dissolved minerals, right?
[Guest]: This is a very non-intuitive thing.
[Guest]: Carrot contains more water than milk, right?
[Guest]: But we don't intuitively think about it.
[Guest]: And understanding that can also mean that, by the way, you could pressure cook carrots,
[Guest]: you can pressure cook some of these root vegetables without adding water, just add butter.
[Guest]: And that way you can actually pressure cook at a higher temperature, you can caramelize
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: And you get fantastic carrot soups.
[Guest]: If you actually pressure cook carrot without water, I mean, yes, you have to be careful,
[Guest]: you have to add a fair bit of butter and all that, but you don't need anything else.
[Guest]: Just salt, carrots and butter will get you an amazing soup because caramelized or Mayard
[Guest]: reaction based carrot is just so tasty, right?
[Amit Varma]: What I also found interesting is how you, you know, you'll talk about these principles
[Amit Varma]: in the context of cooking, and then suddenly you'll take a step out and go somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: Like another quote from the chapter, quote, it's because we have so much water on the
[Amit Varma]: surface that a place like Mumbai has mostly predictable temperatures, while Bhopal can
[Amit Varma]: swing wildly, not just across seasons, but in a single day, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And one more TIL moment for me was how microwaves work, like, of course they are safe and they
[Amit Varma]: don't cause cancer and all of that nonsense, but they actually work just by heating water.
[Amit Varma]: And because all food contains water, it kind of works very, no question, kindly don't laugh
[Amit Varma]: at this, but you know, sometimes I'll put a dish inside the microwave and the dish will
[Amit Varma]: get hot before the food does, but the dish has no water.
[Amit Varma]: So how does that happen?
[Guest]: It is.
[Guest]: So there are some materials.
[Guest]: So microwave mostly heats water.
[Guest]: There are some materials, bakelite, melamine is one of them, which is why not all melamine
[Guest]: is, is microwave safe, right?
[Guest]: Some fats for instance.
[Guest]: So if you think about the principles of how a microwave works, right?
[Guest]: So the funny thing is that it's actually a fair bit of complex quantum physics, right?
[Guest]: So it's like microwave as radiation is incredibly weaker than even visible light, right?
[Guest]: It's actually between radio and infrared.
[Guest]: So what's actually happening there is that it just so happens microwave at the frequency
[Guest]: we tend to use it.
[Guest]: I think it's some 2,800 some megahertz, I forgot what it is.
[Guest]: That specific frequency has just the right amount of energy to heat, to in some sense,
[Guest]: flip a water molecule, right?
[Guest]: And because they keep changing the direction of the microwave, it'll keep flipping back
[Guest]: and forth.
[Guest]: So the water heats up, right?
[Guest]: It's a magnetic pole because water again, hydrogen bond, it's polarized.
[Guest]: So it has a, you know, it'll align itself to an electromagnetic field and so it's flipping
[Guest]: and so that's how it's getting hot, right?
[Guest]: Some materials end up having very similar properties sometimes, which is why some materials
[Guest]: can suddenly get very hot.
[Guest]: Otherwise, in all other situations, the material gets hot because the water gets hot and then
[Guest]: it transfers the heat to the material, which is why, you know, metals, you don't use metals
[Guest]: because you know, they will start sparking, right?
[Guest]: And so that is, so which is why you use microwave safe sort of materials are not great conductors
[Guest]: of heat so that all the heat of the water is not transferred to the material, but it's
[Guest]: just mostly transferred to the food around it, so.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, before we go on to a commercial break, after which we continue our sort of
[Amit Varma]: deep dive into your book, a couple of broad questions, which kind of came up from what
[Amit Varma]: you were saying earlier, one, you spoke about how certain Western foods are designed to
[Amit Varma]: be addictive.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like you to elaborate on what you mean by this and also whether there are Indian
[Amit Varma]: foods which are also like this, like elsewhere in the book, you've pointed out, you pointed
[Amit Varma]: to a swiggy statistic about how biryani is the most ordered food, like every second there
[Amit Varma]: are 8,000 biryanis being ordered or some nonsense like that, you know, so what is this sort
[Amit Varma]: of addictiveness in food, which obviously then, you know, the food industry would want
[Amit Varma]: to exploit.
[Guest]: So, can you elaborate on that?
[Guest]: So obviously, I think, you know, as animals who evolved at a time when the availability
[Guest]: of sugars, which are the most, you know, easy, you know, energy currency for the body, right,
[Guest]: was always historically hard, right?
[Guest]: You know, the availability of, easy availability of sugar is a very modern phenomenon, right?
[Guest]: So our wiring is essentially built on being starved of carbohydrates in general, right?
[Guest]: You remember, before, most of our evolution happened in the pre-agricultural era, right?
[Guest]: So a lot of our brain wiring is still from that pre-agricultural era.
[Guest]: Agriculture is only some 5-6,000 years old, so we haven't actually adapted to the fact
[Guest]: that we are eating a high-grain, high-carbohydrate diet at all, right?
[Guest]: Evolution works on a much longer timescale.
[Guest]: But we were largely just, we were on a diet that was almost entirely meat and the odd
[Guest]: fruit, right, during some season, some berries, like, you know, like any other apes or monkeys,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean, they're omnivores, right?
[Guest]: We are omnivores as well.
[Guest]: And it is essentially that we have not had time to adapt our wiring to the fact that
[Guest]: we now have an unlimited supply of carbohydrates.
[Guest]: And so the way we've evolved is that, one, evolution selected for people who were just
[Guest]: crazily addicted to sugar, right?
[Guest]: And the brain rewards you instantly the moment you eat sugar, right?
[Guest]: The dopamine and all of that, right?
[Guest]: Because you want, that kind of person is more likely to have eaten any kind of fruit, any
[Guest]: ripe fruit, overripe fruit.
[Guest]: Even if it is marginally rotten, he would have still eaten it and survived, as opposed
[Guest]: to someone who did not like the smell, did not eat and therefore starved, right?
[Guest]: So therefore, in a sense that we ended up selecting for people who are naturally, we're
[Guest]: all naturally addicted to sugar, right?
[Guest]: So that's the first natural thing.
[Guest]: So therefore, the food industry's first thing is anything with sugar is going to be addictive,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So cookies, what have you.
[Guest]: Incidentally, even your namkeen is addictive because it has sugar.
[Guest]: If it did not have any sugar, it wouldn't be as tasty.
[Guest]: So there's that as well, right?
[Guest]: Likewise, I think we're also kind of adapted to want a certain amount of salt, not over
[Guest]: salt, but a certain amount of salt is absolutely important.
[Guest]: We don't like food that is not salty, right?
[Guest]: And it is fascinating because the reason we need food with salt, and by the way, if you
[Guest]: notice like animals, carnivores and so on, who don't get access to salt naturally, enough
[Guest]: salt in their diet because all they're eating is meat, they will in fact go find places
[Guest]: where rocks have salt and lick to actually get enough salt for themselves.
[Guest]: And the reason all animals, including us, need that salt is because all of us evolved
[Guest]: from ocean going creatures, all of us came from fishes, right?
[Guest]: And so all our organs are evolved to deal with a certain amount of salt.
[Guest]: And that's why all our cells need a certain amount of salt.
[Guest]: And that's why we need to eat salt, right?
[Guest]: So it's just that although we are now land going and you know, we don't, you know, there's
[Guest]: no salt all around, it is basically remembering our fish ancestors, the fact that we are used
[Guest]: to that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So salt again is something that we are all wired to want, right?
[Guest]: So both sweet and salt.
[Guest]: A couple of other things that the food industry obviously uses is obviously umami.
[Guest]: Umami is one of those, although we understand it technically more recently, but you know,
[Guest]: humans have understood it for a long way, right?
[Guest]: The reason tomato is such a tremendously common base in so many dishes is because it's very
[Guest]: high on glutamates, right?
[Guest]: The very same glutamates found in MSG, by the way.
[Guest]: So our Parmesan cheese, cheese, for example, is another one, meat in general has a lot
[Guest]: of glutamates and so on, right?
[Guest]: Mushrooms and so on.
[Guest]: So umami's advantage is the fact that it actually amplifies other tastes and makes it linger
[Guest]: for longer.
[Guest]: So when you eat like ramen, right?
[Guest]: You get that, that savory feeling lingers in your mouth for a longer time.
[Guest]: So umami is one of those things that amplifies other things and makes it linger, right?
[Guest]: So which is why Japanese food can actually be very minimalist.
[Guest]: So if you're, if it's umami based, you can actually simply just go with a very few other,
[Guest]: you know, spices and other ingredients.
[Guest]: It can be very minimalist because it's still going to taste really, really good, right?
[Guest]: It's still an acquired taste, but so, so there's umami as well, right?
[Guest]: And then the food industry has figured out a couple of other tricks, right?
[Guest]: Fat is another one.
[Guest]: We absolutely are also like fat for no reason other than the fact that it is the densest
[Guest]: nutrient available, right?
[Guest]: So if carbohydrates are like, I think four calories a gram, I think fat is like nine
[Guest]: calories a gram.
[Guest]: It's, it's the densest food, you know, we can eat, very, very nutrient dense.
[Guest]: And so therefore, you know, we have evolved a taste for fatty textures and fatty foods
[Guest]: in general, right?
[Guest]: So if you combine all of this, the food industry also uses tricks with acids, right?
[Guest]: So for example, a Coca-Cola or any carbonated beverage, right, is tremendously acidic because
[Guest]: of the amount of dissolved carbon dioxide and also a couple of phosphoric acid, a bunch
[Guest]: of other things.
[Guest]: It's very, very acidic.
[Guest]: It is more acidic.
[Guest]: A Coca-Cola is more acidic than vinegar, but you can't drink vinegar, but you can drink
[Guest]: a Coca-Cola.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because they add nine teaspoons of sugar into it.
[Guest]: So the nine teaspoons of sugar actually mutes your experience of sourness.
[Guest]: And in a sense that restaurant food essentially does the same thing.
[Guest]: So they add extra salt, but since you'll perceive the extra salt, they'll add extra sugar.
[Guest]: And because they add extra sugar, they can add more acid.
[Guest]: And because they add more acid, the acids will make you salivate more.
[Guest]: They're able to add a lot more of other things, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, it's, it's just ultimately about picking your reward circuits for essentially
[Guest]: sugar is the primary thing and then salt and a bunch of these other things.
[Guest]: But that's largely how a lot of this addiction works and how food companies take advantage.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, in your book, I think you described it as taking the volume dial to 11, what the
[Amit Varma]: restaurants do with the kind of sugar and salt that to balance one, they use the other
[Amit Varma]: and they keep, they take it all the way to up and the flavors are so accentuated in restaurant
[Amit Varma]: food for that reason.
[Amit Varma]: So kindly eat more at home people, etc.
[Amit Varma]: And but why biryani in particular?
[Guest]: And I'm asking because I'm also trying to understand my own regular cravings.
[Guest]: So biryani, again, I think it's one of obviously one of the subcontinents, great dishes.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, if we do a voyage of three, you know, I think definitely, you know, recipe
[Guest]: for biryani ought to be sent out to deep space, if you will, it's one of mankind's.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just one of our best dishes, there's many of our best dishes, because there are
[Guest]: so many, there are so many varieties, but the broad principle of essentially being a
[Guest]: so for starters, it is actually a in a utilitarian fashion.
[Guest]: It is an absolutely dead simple, basic one pot dish, right?
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, you can make, of course, there are sophisticated variants where you can,
[Guest]: you know, but at the basic level, if you're a poor guy with this giant in, you know, your,
[Guest]: your, your, your, your audiences, you know, construction labor and so on, I could just
[Guest]: take rice, you could take meat, you could take spices, and just slow cook it.
[Guest]: And you can't go wrong with it, right?
[Guest]: So you got carbohydrates, you got proteins, there's nothing more you need, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it is, it is a one shot meal, you don't need anything else.
[Guest]: Anything else is primarily I mean, if it turns out to be too dry, you have a raita or whatever
[Guest]: it is.
[Guest]: But, you know, your average construction labor guy is not like eating it with raita or anything,
[Guest]: he's just eating the rice, the meat for him.
[Guest]: It is the quickest, the high dense, nutritious meal in that sense, right?
[Guest]: So if you leave aside that utilitarian aspect, for why it is so ubiquitous, like literally
[Guest]: every Chennai, for instance, every street corner has a has a biryani out there.
[Guest]: I think it is, Chennai is probably one of the largest consumers of biryani per capita
[Guest]: and also chicken, I think.
[Guest]: So one is that.
[Guest]: The second thing is the fact that, look, you know, one, it's an aromatic kind of rice.
[Guest]: So the better the rice, you get that, right?
[Guest]: And meat, right?
[Guest]: Meat has, slow cooked meat has a ton of all those meat juices, all that umami actually
[Guest]: suffuses the entire dish, for starters, right?
[Guest]: And then you're using all of the subcontinent's famous spices, I mean, it could be ginger
[Guest]: garlic, you know, cardamom, you know, and all the things that kind of go into a biryani
[Guest]: masala and so on.
[Guest]: All of these are tremendously sophisticated spices and in some of the most fancy biryanis
[Guest]: that you have, the top note is actually things like saffron, which again is tremendously
[Guest]: complex, right?
[Guest]: Just saffron apparently has some 3,000 or 4,000 different unique aroma molecules, which
[Guest]: is why it is nearly impossible to synthetically synthesize a saffron, but you can synthetically
[Guest]: synthesize, you know, vanilla, for example.
[Guest]: And so it is in a sense that, and there are so many variations, the sequencing, the kind
[Guest]: of rice you use, the kind of meat you use, the kinds of spices you use, how you marinate
[Guest]: the meat.
[Guest]: So there's just so many varieties and it is also at home, so also it's obviously, it's
[Guest]: a special day dish, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's something that you cook on a special day, like, you know, imagine having
[Guest]: to make chapatis or 20 side dishes for a family gathering, when you want to make one biryani,
[Guest]: I mean, it'll feed everyone, right?
[Guest]: I mean, there's that practical nature to it as well.
[Guest]: So for me, I mean, I've always been fascinated by, I like biryani, I'm not like obsessively,
[Guest]: I don't tend to crave it because I tend to, I don't tend to eat too much rice in general.
[Guest]: I tend to sort of eat.
[Guest]: So I have a rice day and then a wheat day and a millet day and things like that.
[Guest]: So I tend to kind of do that.
[Guest]: So, but, you know, on rice day, biryani is almost always welcome.
[Guest]: I mean, because it's perfect, it's umami, it is high in carbohydrates.
[Guest]: It's got a ton of that flavor from the meat, that kind of the meat juices that are not
[Guest]: lost anywhere, because you know, you're sealing the whole thing.
[Guest]: And if it's cooked well, you're not going to overcook the meat.
[Guest]: If it's brined or marinated well, then you know, it's going to be succulent and the spices,
[Guest]: because you're doing the dum, all of the aroma is not lost, right?
[Guest]: So it's all getting sort of amplified.
[Guest]: So I think it's one of the great dishes.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, I shouldn't have asked you the question because now I'm craving a biryani
[Amit Varma]: I had a couple of years back, I went with a bunch of friends on something we call the
[Amit Varma]: spice trail, where we went on this long food trip, and one of the places we went to was
[Amit Varma]: Mysore.
[Amit Varma]: And there we went to a joint where we had pork biryani.
[Amit Varma]: And that was the first time in my life I had pork biryani, I've had, you know, all other
[Amit Varma]: kinds and it was just so mind blowing, you know, the fat and the succulent flavor and
[Guest]: all that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Which reminds me, right, so the fat is actually quite important.
[Guest]: So aromas, as I get to talk about the flavor chapter, is that are not soluble in water.
[Guest]: Most of those volatile flavor molecules are not soluble in water, they're soluble in fat,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Which is why almost all cooking starts with oil spices.
[Guest]: So first you do it before all the spice flavor escapes to the air, you kind of get it into
[Guest]: the oil.
[Guest]: And it's that oil that flavors your dish, essentially, that's the bulk of the flavor
[Guest]: that you get in the dish.
[Guest]: In a biryani, it's amazing because there's going to be, that's why almost a biryani cut
[Guest]: even if you're making like chicken biryani, right?
[Guest]: You're almost always going to ask for lean skin, right?
[Guest]: You want that fat, you don't want lean meat.
[Guest]: Because that fat, when it renders, is first and foremost going to absorb all the saffron
[Guest]: and the cumin and the star anise and all the rest of that.
[Guest]: And just that fat is going to be so flavorful, right?
[Guest]: So I think that plays a huge role in why a biryani is amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Massive role.
[Amit Varma]: Now for the other question before we go into the break, which again came from something
[Amit Varma]: you said in passing a while back where you said that, you know, the taste buds of women,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, are developed differently, they taste food differently.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, why do you think that is?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, are there evolutionary reasons for that, that in a sense, continue into the
[Amit Varma]: culture?
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, men and women respond differently to temperature, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: is why, you know, our modern air conditioning is designed in the 50s and 60s, where offices
[Amit Varma]: were full of men.
[Amit Varma]: So they were designed for the optimal sort of male capacity, while, you know, women feel
[Amit Varma]: colder much sooner.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you could say that that's an example of sort of a world design for men,
[Amit Varma]: so to say.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm very intrigued by this because typically, and I'm sure, and it's obviously not just
[Amit Varma]: in India where, but in India, especially where men expect fresh food three times a day, like
[Amit Varma]: you said, as women who are doing it, it's a very functional thing.
[Amit Varma]: So why do you think the taste buds have evolved separately, are there sort of deeper insights
[Guest]: into humanity here?
[Guest]: So I think, you know, if you think about evolution itself, right, nothing much has evolved in
[Guest]: the last five to 6,000 years, or very little has, right, that's very short a time frame.
[Guest]: So most of our changes, most of the differences that we see, you know, go back much longer,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And in a sense that, you know, because of the traditional gender role, you know, distinctions
[Guest]: between, you know, men go out and hunt, and women kind of, you know, sort of, you know,
[Guest]: take care of the cave and take care of etc, etc.
[Guest]: One obviously, I think, closer environment, naturally, you have to be a lot more sensitive
[Guest]: to smells, to toxins, to things that could kill you, to food that could be rotten, and
[Guest]: spoiled, and so on.
[Guest]: Whereas the great outdoors are different.
[Guest]: So you end up building different muscles, more to do with hand-eye coordination, and
[Guest]: being able to triangulate, you know, where this thing is, you know, where you shoot your
[Guest]: spear and so on.
[Guest]: So in a sense that, on an average, a lot of our differences kind of come from there, right.
[Guest]: So Professor, I think, Linda Bartow-Shook, who's sort of this professor, she's the one
[Guest]: who coined the term supertasters.
[Guest]: So what she says is that the ability to sense flavor is a spectrum, right.
[Guest]: In that, there's a bottom 14% of the population that have very low taste bud density.
[Guest]: And they are terrible at, so they couldn't, they wouldn't be able to tell the difference
[Guest]: between a very tannic wine and a, and like a reasonably decent one, right.
[Guest]: So they wouldn't be able to tell the difference.
[Guest]: And then you have the middle, which is essentially average people, mostly people like us.
[Guest]: And then there's a 14 or 15% at the top end who are actually supertasters.
[Guest]: Supertasters are, so Padma Lakshmi, for example, is an example of someone who underwent the
[Guest]: test.
[Guest]: So there's a test you can go undergo for it, by the way.
[Guest]: So there is apparently one specific molecule that you cannot smell unless you're a supertaster.
[Guest]: You cannot taste it unless you're a supertaster.
[Guest]: If you're a supertaster, it will taste bitter.
[Guest]: If you're not a supertaster, you won't taste it, right.
[Guest]: Some propyl thio-uracil, some sulfur-based molecule, right.
[Guest]: And you can, so you can actually undergo this test.
[Guest]: And there they found out that on an average, women tend to be supertasters more often than
[Guest]: men.
[Guest]: And so, so there is that, right.
[Guest]: So, I mean, but the fact that more men are chefs and all that has more to do with patriarchy
[Guest]: than anything else.
[Guest]: But in general, you know, for example, I realized it pretty quickly at home as well, that my
[Guest]: wife would be earlier to detect that something is burning, minutes ahead before I sense it.
[Guest]: She would sort of detect if, if something needs to, when you taste something, right.
[Guest]: A common mistake that I would often make is that, so you have, your taste buds work ideally
[Guest]: between 20 and 30 Celsius.
[Guest]: They work at a peak at that temperature.
[Guest]: At higher temperatures, they don't work as well, and at lower temperatures, they don't
[Guest]: work as well.
[Guest]: So, which is incidentally why hot coffee is acceptable.
[Guest]: Room temperature coffee is atrociously bitter, right, because when it's that hot, you can
[Guest]: ignore the bitterness and enjoy the aroma.
[Guest]: But the moment it's room temperature, then the coffee will only primarily taste bitter
[Guest]: and so on, right.
[Guest]: So likewise, they also have more temperature sensors in their mouth, which also makes it
[Guest]: a lot more sensitive for them.
[Guest]: So I will just take a spoon directly from the boiling pot, and then I will taste it.
[Guest]: And then I will say, can you please taste it?
[Guest]: They'll say, wait, I've burnt my mouth several times.
[Guest]: So obviously, they're more sensitive to higher temperatures, therefore more sensitive to
[Guest]: heat.
[Guest]: Chilies, right?
[Guest]: So chilies essentially are basically fooling you into thinking that it's temperature, right?
[Guest]: So and so on.
[Guest]: So it is, yeah.
[Guest]: So this is just possibly why they're better tasters in general.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I want to discuss chilies in detail after the break, because it's absolutely mind
[Amit Varma]: blowing what chilies do.
[Amit Varma]: It was like a TIL moment for me.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, oh, that is why I am being fooled by my own brain.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, oh, my God, this is grace and, you know, and since your wife is so much more
[Amit Varma]: sensitive about this, she should have written the book, why did you write the book, guy?
[Guest]: Well, you know, that's why I credit her right up front.
[Guest]: She's one of those utilitarian bosses, I'm not going to sit and follow your methodical
[Guest]: scientific AB testing instructions, you know, she's somebody who cooks, you know, with her
[Guest]: gut.
[Guest]: And, as I said, she makes a better rasam than I do, you know, I'm like measuring, you know,
[Guest]: testing sourness and doing all of that stuff.
[Guest]: And she's like, yeah, that's also the, at the end of the day, it's also about recognition
[Guest]: that of the fact that for a lot of, I was very aware for a lot of women in India, cooking
[Guest]: is not some, I can't force you to think of it as some amazing adventure that you can,
[Guest]: you know, do all of this, understand all of the science, because you just want to feed
[Guest]: your family in as quick a time as possible.
[Guest]: So you can actually get back to your career, you can get back to your studies and do other
[Guest]: things, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, there was also this conscious mindset that this cannot be a gratuitous exercise
[Guest]: in saying, hey, you can do all these fancy things.
[Guest]: I mean, I can't, I can't ask, I don't want to ask people to do something in a more elaborate
[Guest]: way because the flavor will be better if I don't give them a more efficient way to do
[Guest]: it as well, right?
[Guest]: Because at the end of the day, it has to be utilitarian in that sense.
[Guest]: It can't be just for the sake of it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, very true.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break in which time you will no doubt whip up something mind
[Amit Varma]: blowingly tasty and, you know, eat it in front of me on the camera and just drive me nuts.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll be back after a minute.
[Amit Varma]: As many of you know, I'll soon be coming out with a four volume anthology of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen books organized around the themes of politics, history, economics, and society
[Amit Varma]: and culture.
[Amit Varma]: These days, I'm wading through over 3 million words of conversation from all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: so far to curate the best bits.
[Amit Varma]: And for this to happen, I needed transcripts.
[Amit Varma]: And that was made possible by a remarkable young startup called TAPCHIEF.
[Amit Varma]: TAPCHIEF at TAPCHIEF.com is a digital platform that allows companies to outsource work to
[Amit Varma]: their network of freelancers.
[Amit Varma]: And TAPCHIEF's network includes more than 125,000 people as of now.
[Amit Varma]: You want people to make you a webpage or design a logo or compose a jingle or do some digital
[Amit Varma]: marketing for you?
[Amit Varma]: TAPCHIEF gives you an easy way to reach out to freelancers competing for your work.
[Amit Varma]: I can say from firsthand experience how valuable this has been for me and solve the problem
[Amit Varma]: I was actually a bit worried about.
[Amit Varma]: So do go over to TAPCHIEF.com and check out all that TAPCHIEF has to offer.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they could solve your problem too.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Krish Ashok about his remarkable book Masala Lab and you know, I learned so
[Amit Varma]: much from that book about food and the way it works, especially about chilies where I
[Amit Varma]: felt kind of cheated and manipulated.
[Amit Varma]: Let me, you know, in my own words, very briefly try to kind of explain what happens that you
[Amit Varma]: know, one of the things you've pointed out, which I will ask you to elaborate on later
[Amit Varma]: because it's endlessly fascinating to me is that all flavors are the defense mechanisms
[Amit Varma]: of plants which do not want to be eaten.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that's where chili also comes from, you know, where they release this substance
[Amit Varma]: that fools our brain into thinking that our mouth is literally on fire.
[Amit Varma]: Now technically, this should be enough reason to stop eating anything, but our brain responds
[Amit Varma]: by releasing a flood of endorphins to counter the pain.
[Amit Varma]: And these endorphins then make you know, the food that we are eating appear tastier than
[Amit Varma]: it is, which is why we keep on eating and it is eventually a vicious circle to the point
[Amit Varma]: where you're like putting both chilaquiles and everything or not exactly.
[Amit Varma]: But that's why we kind of eat a lot of chili food.
[Amit Varma]: And you had an amusing anecdote from Sri Lanka, in fact, about Coca-Cola.
[Amit Varma]: So tell us a little bit about chilies and what it is, I mean, this is crazy, man.
[Guest]: So I've been endlessly fascinated by chilies, obviously, as a South Indian, obviously, we're
[Guest]: generally eating above average, hotter food than most parts of the planet.
[Guest]: And particularly, I think my mom's cooking was particularly spicier than normal.
[Guest]: My father used to have mouth ulcers very regularly, but he wouldn't complain.
[Guest]: So it was just quietly take, you know, a ripple flaming, you know, to deal with the ulcers.
[Guest]: But you know, so she clearly had a, she had a taste for chilies.
[Guest]: And I think all of us ended up sort of getting used to it.
[Guest]: I don't think you inherit it, you just get used to it.
[Guest]: So because the way this works is that it's basically a nerve receptor in the mouth, which
[Guest]: is why it's not a taste, it's a sensation.
[Guest]: So heat is not a taste, heat is a sensation.
[Guest]: So taste comes from the taste buds, right?
[Guest]: So taste buds essentially work by very specific sensors that detect for something, right?
[Guest]: So salt sensors detect sodium.
[Guest]: So anything with sodium will taste salty.
[Guest]: So that's just why salt is salty, sodium chloride is salty, monosodium glutamate is also salt,
[Guest]: not as salty, but you know, still salt, right?
[Guest]: And other things in these, that family, even potassium chloride, it will taste mildly salty,
[Guest]: and so on, right?
[Guest]: And so, so there is, so heat is actually a sensation.
[Guest]: So the distinction is that the taste buds are actually very specifically detecting for
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: Sensations are actually primarily to warn you against things like something, you're
[Guest]: eating something too acidic, you're eating something that is too hot, right?
[Guest]: So obviously, I think we needed warning because, you know, your entire digestive tract is very
[Guest]: sensitive, right?
[Guest]: So if you're putting something that's really hot, or very acidic, like a concentrated sulfuric
[Guest]: acid or something, it's going to burn you all the way down.
[Guest]: And so it's a warning mechanism that has evolved to prevent us from eating the things that
[Guest]: are too hot, right?
[Guest]: And so the entirety of our digestive tract has those sensors that detect for temperature,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And so plants are basically nature's absolutely biochemical magicians, in the sense that,
[Guest]: forget animals, in terms of the sheer diversity of molecules that plants can synthesize, nothing
[Guest]: comes anywhere close, right, which is why there's still a ton of drugs that you cannot
[Guest]: simply use a simple laboratory chemical process to synthesize them because they're just too
[Guest]: complicated.
[Guest]: You need to genetically modify a bacteria or something else or a fungi to be able to
[Guest]: generate what you need, because you need the kind of protein synthesis apparatus that plants
[Guest]: have is just otherworldly.
[Guest]: And obviously, they've been around for billions of years longer than we have.
[Guest]: And so they have amassed an arsenal of variety of tricks, right?
[Guest]: So chilies in this entire thing have figured out a trick by which they produce a family
[Guest]: of chemicals called capsaicinoids, which happen to fit into the heat receptors that are there
[Guest]: in your mouth, right, and in your digestive tract, right?
[Guest]: And so the moment they fit in, the signal goes to the brain saying that yeah, this thing
[Guest]: is on and the brain is like, oh, your mouth must be on fire.
[Guest]: So let me take action.
[Guest]: So immediately it'll start sending more blood because it wants to cool down your face, so
[Guest]: you get that flush, or you start sweating to cool your body down, that all the things
[Guest]: that you get when you bite into a chili, right?
[Guest]: So it's basically all of that.
[Guest]: And because you have now, the body thinks you will now be in pain, although the whole
[Guest]: thing is completely phantom, right?
[Guest]: The brain also thinks that let me start the reward circuits so that the guy is not incapacitated.
[Guest]: So that's important because, you know, so the slightest amount of pain cannot incapacitate
[Guest]: you, because then otherwise, you know, a moderately injured human being would have been eaten
[Guest]: by a predator.
[Guest]: So you need to be able to actually operate better under a slight amount of pain.
[Guest]: So the endorphins and all of that actually give you that sort of second wind and you
[Guest]: are, you know, enthused to sort of sit and run, right, or get up and run, right?
[Guest]: So that's why when you eat chilies, those endorphins get released and that in turn makes
[Guest]: the whole eating process a lot more pleasurable within a certain margin, right?
[Guest]: But varies by individual.
[Guest]: Some people are very sensitive, some people are not as sensitive.
[Guest]: And also, you have these sensors all the way down your track to varying this thing, which
[Guest]: is why, you know, you feel the heat in your mouth and then a little bit later in your
[Guest]: stomach and the next day morning somewhere else, right?
[Guest]: Because it is, you know, so you're going to feel that all through, right?
[Guest]: And this is also why capsaicinoids in general are used in pepper sprays for women to protect
[Guest]: themselves, right?
[Guest]: Because what you want is something that incapacitates you without permanently damaging.
[Guest]: That you don't want a chemical that will make the guy go blind.
[Guest]: You want something that fools the brain into thinking your eyes are on fire.
[Guest]: So please shut everything down till everything is okay so that you can escape and then you'll
[Guest]: be fine.
[Guest]: So it does no long lasting damage to the person's eyes at all, right?
[Guest]: So you know, that's, so chilies have been endlessly fascinating, right?
[Guest]: So and the fact that we've, you know, agriculturists have managed to figure out how to make hotter
[Guest]: and hotter ones than just the natural ones.
[Guest]: So there's the Bujalochia, which is one of the most hottest natural varieties.
[Guest]: But you know, there are now competitions where, you know, there's a guy in North Carolina
[Guest]: who makes this variety called the Carolina Reaper, you know?
[Guest]: So the last time I went abroad, I did buy two of them.
[Guest]: It's sitting in my freezer, you need to use gloves to handle them.
[Guest]: So they're like 1.4 billion Scoville units.
[Guest]: So you can use one to flavor, you know, a big tub of food, right?
[Guest]: It is that hot, right?
[Guest]: And so yeah, chilies have been endlessly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And you also point out how, you know, fat, you know, mitigates the effect of that kind
[Amit Varma]: of heat, which is why in something like gunpowder, you will also have some ghee or whatever along
[Amit Varma]: with it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, alcohol mutes it as well, which is why when you're on a drinking binge, you'll
[Amit Varma]: have a lot of, you know, your snacks can get spicier and spicier, but acid amplifies heat.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, if you, you know, sort of have that heat and you drink some Coca Cola, you
[Guest]: are basically screwed.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, which is right.
[Guest]: So fat actually dissolves the capsaicin.
[Guest]: So it washes it.
[Guest]: So it's easier to wash it off, right?
[Guest]: Water, water does not.
[Guest]: So which is why drinking water, although you, you think it helps, it doesn't help as much.
[Guest]: So in fact, I think it's that there's that there's this famous YouTube show where this
[Guest]: guy gives people hot wings, increasingly hotter after each other, celebrities and ask them
[Guest]: questions.
[Guest]: And he saves the toughest questions when the guy's eating like the spiciest wings that
[Guest]: people give incredibly candid answers.
[Guest]: So it's a fantastic show.
[Guest]: And so he gives everyone a glass of milk.
[Guest]: So if you feel very hot, you just drink milk, a kind of, you know, gargle it.
[Guest]: And you could you could spit the milk out, right?
[Guest]: So that way, the milk will wash all of the milk fats will wash all the capsaicin from
[Guest]: from your mouth.
[Amit Varma]: And you can get rid of it.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: And elaborate a bit on, you know, flavors being defense mechanisms of plants, like you've
[Amit Varma]: described this sort of apocryphal battle where plants come and they do all these processes
[Amit Varma]: over thousands of years, and they evolve a certain way to get energy from the sun and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then these lazy animals, you know, just come around and chomp them up and get their
[Amit Varma]: energy that way.
[Amit Varma]: And then the plants have to fight back and all flavors of food arise from that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So rather quite fascinating aha moment for me was this realization that plants are biochemical
[Guest]: superstars.
[Guest]: Again, largely, again, because they don't move, they don't have the ability to move.
[Guest]: And the reason they don't have the ability to move is because photosynthesis is ridiculously
[Guest]: inefficient.
[Guest]: And amazingly enough, I don't get into the details of this because it wasn't relevant,
[Guest]: but I did write a Twitter thread about it.
[Guest]: Photosynthesis is inefficient for another really fascinating reason, which is that one
[Guest]: of the steps in photosynthesis, like one of hundreds of steps in converting sunlight into
[Guest]: glucose, right?
[Guest]: One of those steps apparently required a low oxygen atmosphere because plants were living
[Guest]: in a completely low oxygen atmosphere.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, we live in a high oxygen atmosphere now.
[Guest]: So which is why photosynthesis is the entirety of photosynthesis and the fact that we don't
[Guest]: have walking trees is because we have too much oxygen in the atmosphere, right?
[Guest]: So it's quite fascinating.
[Guest]: So one, therefore, plants, their mechanism is fundamentally, therefore, to evolve chemical
[Guest]: defenses against predators.
[Guest]: Plants on the other hand, their biggest trick is essentially their ability to move, right?
[Guest]: If you can move, then you can essentially eat other things.
[Guest]: And if you can eat other things, then you let that thing do all the hard work of turning
[Guest]: sunlight into energy over months.
[Guest]: And you get those calories in literally, you know, in a matter of hours, right?
[Guest]: I mean, a potato takes months to grow, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you can eat that potato in literally a few seconds and you get a ton of energy
[Guest]: from that.
[Guest]: We are tremendously more energy efficient, our metabolic rate is so much higher than
[Guest]: plants and so on, right?
[Guest]: So therefore, which is why we are not biochemistry superstars at all, we didn't need to.
[Guest]: So a lot of the animal evolution has been different ways in which we could move, right?
[Guest]: Fly and, you know, and four legs and, you know, all kinds of swimming and all kinds
[Guest]: of other mechanics to move and then ultimately, obviously, brain development and so on, right?
[Guest]: But plants, therefore, over 3 billion years have evolved fantastic mechanisms, a variety
[Guest]: of mechanisms to prevent animals from eating it and it's a two-way battle, right?
[Guest]: So like, for example, chilies, fantastic example is chilies itself.
[Guest]: Birds don't have that sensor, so in the sense that capsaicin doesn't affect them, right?
[Guest]: Which is actually quite fine because the way it's worked out is that they end up pollinating.
[Guest]: So it's just that this is not a one-way thing, right?
[Guest]: So it's just a very complex ecosystem thing that constantly happens and it's sometimes
[Guest]: very hard to kind of work it out after the fact also, right?
[Guest]: And sometimes you tell yourself one story and then five years later, you'll discover
[Guest]: some fossil record that says, no, no, this is actually completely different and this
[Guest]: is not what it was and so on.
[Guest]: So fascinatingly, plants have evolved a bunch of defense mechanism, broadly from the point
[Guest]: of view of what is relevant to food.
[Guest]: So there are two things, situations where the plant wants you to eat it because it wants
[Guest]: you to pollinate, spread the seeds somewhere else.
[Guest]: That's a fruit.
[Guest]: A fruit is basically, you know, the pinnacle of plant biochemistry in creating something
[Guest]: that requires no cooking.
[Guest]: It is just you take it off the tree and you eat it and it does not get any more delicious
[Guest]: than that, right?
[Guest]: And, you know, you take a perfectly ripe mango, right, or a perfectly crisp apple, I mean,
[Guest]: you can realize the fact that it's really billions of years of evolution of figuring
[Guest]: out exactly what it is that animals or others want to eat, right?
[Guest]: So likewise, defense mechanisms are again, one of many.
[Guest]: Mostly they have to do with use of things like sulfurous, mostly sulfurous molecules,
[Guest]: okay?
[Guest]: Which is actually why most of our tastiest spices have sulfurous molecules in them, right?
[Guest]: Onion, asafoetida, you name it, like curry leaves, all of these primarily have sulfurous
[Guest]: molecules because you try feeding that to a cow or a herbivore, they find it very nasty,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: We, on the other hand, can tame that by cooking it, right?
[Guest]: It's hard for us to eat a raw onion or a garlic, but once you cook it, we're taming a lot of
[Guest]: those reactions so that we are able to actually eat it.
[Guest]: So it's just that for us, we've managed to kind of figure out how to get past the defense
[Guest]: mechanisms.
[Guest]: And now there's actually another, so I was reading Michael Pollan's book, I think it's
[Guest]: the Botany of Desire, right?
[Guest]: And he kind of says that, you know, I think we see it from a very anthropocentric view,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: See, when you think of the fact that whether it's the humans who are, you know, growing
[Guest]: apples or growing corn all over the place, or is it that has the plant actually biochemically
[Guest]: got you addicted enough to the point where there's actually more biomass of corn today
[Guest]: than human beings?
[Guest]: So if aliens, there's this joke about aliens coming to planet and figuring out who's the
[Guest]: dominant species, will they go walk up to a stock of corn or rice, or will they walk
[Guest]: up to a human being is something that we'll have to figure out because purely from a pure
[Guest]: play of evolutionary success, they've been tremendously successful because they've convinced
[Guest]: us to grow them and also kill all their competition.
[Guest]: So we do monoculture by not letting any other plant grow for acres and acres.
[Guest]: And so in that sense, the plant is actually successful in that sense, right?
[Guest]: So there are many defense mechanisms, different spices.
[Guest]: So the stronger the spice, the stronger the defense mechanism.
[Guest]: So that's essentially how all of these, so you take a ginger, onion, garlic, all of these
[Guest]: are strong antibacterial or antifungal or anti sort of anti, you know, animal eating
[Guest]: kind of mechanisms.
[Guest]: And that's essentially how we got all our spices.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a, that's a lovely insight that you just quoted from Pauline as well.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's a famous Douglas Adams quote, I think about imagine a puddle of water and
[Amit Varma]: one day the puddle of water wakes up and this is of course also an anthropocentric view
[Amit Varma]: of a puddle of water because puddles of water can't think.
[Amit Varma]: But the puddle of water decides that, Hey, you know, this universe must be made for me
[Amit Varma]: because everything is such a perfect fit.
[Amit Varma]: And it keeps sinking that gradually one day it is no longer there, you know?
[Amit Varma]: So now tell me a bit about spices.
[Amit Varma]: We've basically, and this is obviously fortuitous.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think it is that, you know, that there was any sense when these defense mechanisms
[Amit Varma]: were evolving that they will actually help, you know, spread this stuff about.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, I just want to, I found that thought of, you know, walking trees in an
[Amit Varma]: atmosphere with less oxygen.
[Amit Varma]: So utterly delightful.
[Amit Varma]: So you have a lot of the rings, you have the ends.
[Amit Varma]: So that's the, yeah, except the ends are there along with hobbits and humans, and that's
[Amit Varma]: obviously not possible.
[Amit Varma]: It's one or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And I think I prefer the walking trees.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about spices.
[Amit Varma]: Now you've elaborated on spices in great detail.
[Amit Varma]: And to be honest, I am going to reread this and sort of take my time to process it.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, like I cook a little bit, but my cooking is all the kind of cooking that
[Amit Varma]: you would really frown upon.
[Amit Varma]: It is basically, I'll have a recipe which I've mugged up and something has worked for
[Amit Varma]: me in the past and is very functional and I don't kind of think about it.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, after I read your book, I figured that, listen, this is like so fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and I've got to kind of play around a bit.
[Amit Varma]: Now you point out that, you know, you divide spices into four broad buckets.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously there are, there's a much subtler gradation, which you also describe,
[Amit Varma]: but tell me a bit about these four buckets and tell me how we should think about spices
[Amit Varma]: in general.
[Amit Varma]: Like, especially all the people who are in India right now, and we cook here and we have
[Amit Varma]: kitchens and we have access to all of these spices.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: How should we think about them?
[Guest]: So, so first I think, you know, let me start by saying that first and foremost, there's
[Guest]: no such thing as a wrong way to cook or a wrong way to approach cooking.
[Guest]: I think that's a rule number zero, right, is that you cook, it feeds you, you like it,
[Guest]: you know, that's basically great.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I think the first and foremost thing is to get this whole sense of superiority about,
[Guest]: yes, it's actually, it's perfectly fine to learn from recipes and cook, you know, everyone
[Guest]: has their own mental model, if you will.
[Guest]: So getting to spices, right?
[Guest]: So spices are actually quite fascinating because they're rather central to Indian cooking,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And there's also this other, there's this gentleman called Ganesh Bagler, who's I think
[Guest]: in the IIIT, and I read this talk of his, he's written a paper on how a lot of traditional
[Guest]: science about how flavors combine in the West, right, is predicated on what we call sharing
[Guest]: flavor molecules, right?
[Guest]: So the things that share flavor molecules, like if something has three flavor molecules
[Guest]: and this one has four flavor molecules and two of them are common, then the general theory
[Guest]: is that if you combine both of them together, it will taste better because they'll kind
[Guest]: of, you know, harmoniously go together, right?
[Guest]: So they've worked out a lot of these combinations, which is why you kind of have this, you know,
[Guest]: there's a steak and butter sauce sort of thing, because there's some molecules that are similar.
[Guest]: You can have cranberry sauce and ligandberry sauce and meatballs, because some, you know,
[Guest]: so you have these standard combinations in the West, which are all based on this idea.
[Guest]: Now, what Ganesh Bagler actually says is that Southeast Asian and South Asian cooking actually
[Guest]: takes a fundamentally opposite approach.
[Guest]: A lot of our cooking actually works by taking things that you would not believe should work
[Guest]: together by that original sort of Western idea, and they work together fantastically,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And that thinking is now going back into the West.
[Guest]: So there is now, there's actually, there's a book called Art of Flavor, I think.
[Guest]: It's actually written by a perfumier, which again, goes back to the fact that a lot of
[Guest]: taste, a lot of flavor is actually aroma, right?
[Guest]: It's a guy who makes perfumes and a chef, and they've kind of got together and tried
[Guest]: to concoct these completely new contrasting combinations.
[Guest]: I'll give you one odd example before we get to spices, right?
[Guest]: One of the fascinating examples he says is that if you take some coffee beans, like whole
[Guest]: coffee beans, and put them in a baking tray and put cut, chopped, cut carrots, and then
[Guest]: drizzle some olive oil and let it bake for like, you know, 30 minutes.
[Guest]: He says that the, I mean, coffee is fantastically complex, right?
[Guest]: There are many of these flavor molecules that for some bizarre reason work fantastically
[Guest]: well with carrot, and that carrot will taste like nothing you've ever had.
[Guest]: And this is just literally just carrot and, you know, and coffee, coffee beans, and you
[Guest]: can just add some salt.
[Guest]: Obviously you need some salt.
[Guest]: Carrots anyway are sweet, right?
[Guest]: So they have sugar.
[Guest]: So kind of coming to spices, right?
[Guest]: Indian subcontinental cooking is, is, you know, so I often say that Japanese cooking
[Guest]: is umami centered, in that the basic principle is to create a umami laden broth, either by
[Guest]: use of seaweed and kombu and dashi, you know, tuna flakes and all these other things.
[Guest]: You create a very umami laden broth, then all the other ingredients can be very minimalist.
[Guest]: You can literally just drop raw meat, raw, this thing's raw, just mildly cooked vegetables
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: The broth is going to be so flavorful that that's really what centers the whole thing.
[Guest]: India has a fat and spice base in the sense that you, you basically all cooking starts
[Guest]: by eating fat and putting some spices into it.
[Guest]: You can't say this for Western cooking, not all dishes start by eating oil and putting
[Guest]: some spices, right?
[Guest]: So you start either by baking, you make a batter or you roast vegetables or you sort
[Guest]: of, you rub something on meat and you oven grill it.
[Guest]: So it's, it's not, it's not like that, right?
[Guest]: India, on the other hand, it is, it is very much a fat and spice driven world.
[Guest]: And I often sort of, I realized that a lot of Indians were kind of looking at spices
[Guest]: in the wrong way, right?
[Guest]: One is the fact that not realizing that spice flavor is volatile, that it is largely soluble
[Guest]: only in fat and or alcohol, right?
[Guest]: Very little in water, right?
[Guest]: So this should therefore tell you something, right?
[Guest]: Any spices after you've added water, right, you're, you're going to start to lose it to
[Guest]: the air.
[Guest]: So therefore, when you add powdered spices to a gravy, the earlier you add it, the more
[Guest]: flavor you're going to lose, which would therefore tell you that literally any recipe that basically
[Guest]: says that you heat the oil, you add some spices, you add your gravy, you add tomatoes or ginger,
[Guest]: onion, garlic, et cetera.
[Guest]: Then you add water, some kind of gravy, and then you put the new powder, jeera powder
[Guest]: and something like that.
[Guest]: The earlier you use it in the cooking process, the more flavor you're largely going to lose,
[Guest]: which is okay because how people adjust is by adding tons of it, right?
[Guest]: So people will say, add a tablespoon of teriya powder.
[Guest]: On the other hand, I realize that, you know what, if you get freshly made teriya powder
[Guest]: and you add it right at the end, just like you would add garam masala, you'll get the
[Guest]: same effect and you just need to add a quarter teaspoon.
[Guest]: So there's a simple economics thing here as well.
[Guest]: If you understand why you're doing what you're doing, you can actually be much smarter about
[Guest]: it, right?
[Guest]: And the second thing is about the fact that because they're so volatile, a lot of these
[Guest]: spices, which are again expensive, you know, on a per gram basis, you don't want to buy
[Guest]: powders and just keep them at room temperature, right?
[Guest]: Indian climate is brutal.
[Guest]: I mean, they're going to oxidize and they're going to taste like sand, right?
[Guest]: So you want to freeze or refrigerate powdered spices because, you know, you're buying chana
[Guest]: masala, right?
[Guest]: You're going to use like a tablespoon or so, and a hundred grams are going to sit around
[Guest]: becoming sand, right?
[Guest]: So you want to refrigerate or freeze, or what I tell people is that, look, get yourself
[Guest]: a cheap coffee grinder and make a ton of these things that you do otherwise very regularly,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You can make relatively decent sized batches of say, then your powder or Jira powder, literally
[Guest]: in a coffee grinder.
[Guest]: And that way that taste is just way better because the whole spice does not lose aroma,
[Guest]: whereas your powdered spices lose aroma, right?
[Guest]: So this is another kind of, you know, key insight in terms of, you know, how spices
[Guest]: work, right?
[Guest]: And the distinction between, so how wet or fresh spices work, like your ginger, onion,
[Guest]: garlic, and those kinds of things, you know, and how herbs, leaves in general work, like
[Guest]: garnishes, right?
[Guest]: So because you don't cook them a lot, right?
[Guest]: Because they lose a lot of the aroma very quickly, right?
[Guest]: Whole spices work in a, essentially by, you want to either powder them and add them later,
[Guest]: or you want to add them to your oil upfront so that you get all the flavor into the oil.
[Guest]: So that's basically the broad principles, right?
[Guest]: And also, remember that there are certain standard combinations that really work, right?
[Guest]: And they kind of evoke a very specific region, right?
[Guest]: So if you take Ajwain or Radhuni or Fenugreek and Nigella, mustard and cumin, and you fry
[Guest]: these in mustard oil, no matter what you do after that, it will evoke Bengal, right?
[Guest]: If you take coconut oil, then you kind of put garlic and red chilies and curry leaves
[Guest]: and mustard and so on.
[Guest]: It will evoke Kerala, you know, no matter what you do after that, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, the realization ultimately, therefore, is that this spice, flavor, and
[Guest]: the fat combination pretty much really just determines the regional flavor profile of
[Guest]: all Indian cuisines, right?
[Guest]: What you choose to do and what kind of mixes you choose to use, what whole spices you use
[Guest]: and what powdered spices you use, it literally determines.
[Guest]: All the rest are actually, so therefore, you can mix and match, right?
[Guest]: Nothing stops you from making, taking, for example, a Shukto in Bengal is very similar
[Guest]: to an Aviyal in the way it's made, except that the fat is different, the spices are
[Guest]: different, right?
[Guest]: And the starch binder is different, right?
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know, you could mix and match and really.
[Guest]: So I think in a sense, understanding spice as well will actually make you a more experimental
[Guest]: cook because then you're not worried about the other ingredients.
[Guest]: You can make anything with anything.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you have a delightful video on the making of Shukto as well.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link your channel from the notes so the listeners can discover that.
[Amit Varma]: And I watched it at double speed, actually, I must confess, but that was enough for me.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, if I want to actually make it, I'll have to obviously watch it at regular speed
[Amit Varma]: and take notes and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Another interesting thing you pointed out, like, you know, when you spoke about make
[Amit Varma]: your own spice mix, I was like, yes, I am going to do just that.
[Amit Varma]: But then you said that don't use a blender, use a mortar and pestle because the blender
[Amit Varma]: will, you know, the thing rotates so fast that it will actually start cooking the spices
[Amit Varma]: as it is grinding them.
[Amit Varma]: And the lazy bong in me immediately responded to that and said, what I have to do so much
[Amit Varma]: work, you know, which is something in Indian cooking, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like Indian recipes seem so daunting to me sometimes because there are like 84,000 ingredients
[Amit Varma]: in every one of them and is that a bit of a stumbling block or is it not really as hard
[Guest]: as it seems?
[Guest]: It is not as hard.
[Guest]: If you understand the function, each one of those families of ingredients play in a dish
[Guest]: and therefore mentally you can kind of figure out what is absolutely mandatory and what
[Guest]: is not.
[Guest]: And what you can replace with whatever you have with a common mistake is to take a recipe
[Guest]: which has like 20 ingredients.
[Guest]: First thing you go, go to a store and buy like 200 grams and 250 grams of every one
[Guest]: of those things, which are going to use a tiny portion off and then the rest of it is
[Guest]: going to go waste.
[Guest]: And I think the amount of waste generated in a country that is famously frugal in, in,
[Guest]: in how we waste spices is just quite crazy, right?
[Guest]: And that too comes from this, this traditional idea that some of the refrigerator is bad
[Guest]: and that the things that you keep in the refrigerator are not fresh, which is very counterproductive,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean, actually things kept in the refrigerator stay fresh, right?
[Guest]: Because the very definition of freshness is, is, is the fact that if you stop biological
[Guest]: activity, which stops at, you know, a couple of Celsius below zero or really slowing down
[Guest]: biological activity, that's freshness, right?
[Guest]: So, which is why I kind of say that, you know, frozen vegetables are actually fresher than,
[Guest]: than actual fresh vegetables in cities, right?
[Guest]: Because the frozen vegetables were frozen very little after they were harvested.
[Guest]: The actual fresh vegetables have been outside for a much longer time before they got to
[Guest]: your city, right?
[Guest]: So therefore coming back to spices, right?
[Guest]: So the thought process was not to say that, you know, you must use a mortar and pestle,
[Guest]: but it's to understand one, why we use that, right?
[Guest]: One is that historically we use mortar and pestle because it is a gentler way of actually
[Guest]: breaking into and sort of extracting flavors out of these things without generating heat,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Whereas the rapidly spinning blade is going to end up generating a ton of heat and heat
[Guest]: means that the volatile molecules are going to escape.
[Guest]: So you want to lose a little bit more of the aroma, right?
[Guest]: And some of that stuff at high temperature will also oxidize.
[Guest]: And so therefore that's going to lose a little bit of flavor.
[Guest]: So which is why, for example, you know, my maternal grandfather was a notorious patriarch
[Guest]: in terms of, he would ask his, my grandmother was a fantastic cook, right?
[Guest]: The one who's quoted in the starting this thing.
[Guest]: So she was a great cook obviously because he was very demanding.
[Guest]: And he would say that chutney made for idli, right?
[Guest]: Not in a mixi, right?
[Guest]: He did not buy her a mixi for many years because he felt that the taste that you get from a
[Guest]: mortar and pestle is better than what you get from mixi.
[Guest]: He was right about the fact that you get better taste.
[Guest]: But obviously it's a terrible choice to make because you know, she was slaving at the kitchen
[Guest]: in a day in and day out.
[Guest]: And sometimes you, you know, you have to make these compromises based on how much time you
[Guest]: have, right?
[Guest]: So therefore, if you think, if you don't want to mix your own spices, et cetera, by all
[Guest]: means buy spice powders, but freeze them, not refrigerate.
[Guest]: Four or five Celsius is still has a ton of biological activity happens.
[Guest]: It's only under 15 or 16 Celsius below zero that you are genuinely keeping stuff for months
[Guest]: on it.
[Guest]: So you need to put them in the freezer, right?
[Guest]: But if you're fancy up to it, then, you know, get yourself a spice grinder, you'll save
[Guest]: money on the long run.
[Guest]: That's that.
[Guest]: But if you're really artisanal and you have the time and effort, I do want to make say
[Guest]: the greatest chutney you possibly can, then you should use a mortar and pestle.
[Guest]: So it's just understanding why, what each of these things does.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess some of it is psychological, like you've pointed out, I think you had a lovely,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you talk about 80% of days being the nose, you had a lovely drawing alongside
[Amit Varma]: it, where you also talk about how site matters, you know, how the food is presented will matter,
[Amit Varma]: what you think about it will matter.
[Amit Varma]: I remember reading long ago about some blind test involving wines, fine wines, and people
[Amit Varma]: couldn't make out the difference between thousand dollar wines and $10 wines when they were
[Amit Varma]: blind.
[Guest]: So it's...
[Guest]: Very much.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So beyond, I mean, in fact, if you think about the role of nostalgia, the role of memories
[Guest]: and all of that is very, very, very important in how you perceive a flavor, and people mostly
[Guest]: fail, tend to fail blind taste tests when it comes to very specific things about, oh,
[Guest]: I can tell the difference between, like, for example, people actually fail a blind taste
[Guest]: test between synthetic vanilla, which is 25 rupees a bottle, and real vanilla, which is
[Guest]: insanely expensive.
[Guest]: And this, in many cases, as part of cakes and desserts, people regularly choose the
[Guest]: synthetic vanilla as tasting better and more natural.
[Guest]: So it is, it is just that, you know, people have these crazy notions.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's insane.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and the difference between the two is that, you know, the real vanilla is manufactured
[Amit Varma]: by a kind of random process through nature.
[Amit Varma]: And this one is manufactured much more sort of directionally as it was, so, you know,
[Amit Varma]: which one is likely to be better.
[Guest]: Not to mention the sustainability of the fact that it grows only in Madagascar and all the
[Guest]: other attendant problems of that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you spoke of nostalgia and that's, you know, one of the sort of another
[Amit Varma]: of the TIL moments in there, for me, like it was when you were talking about Maggi masala,
[Amit Varma]: the instant noodle kind of mix where you point out that so many people like it so much because
[Amit Varma]: it has such a combination that it will remind everybody of something of the spice mix they
[Guest]: grew up with.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It is actually so, you know, I spent a lot of time looking at the, analyzing the Maggi
[Guest]: masala.
[Guest]: I mean, incidentally, it's not just an Indian thing, right?
[Guest]: So Nestle is basically kind of cracked the, this whole idea of this, some kind of umami
[Guest]: or a flavor sachet or a cube or whatever it is, or a sauce.
[Guest]: So this whole Maggi flavoring masala in India, cubes in the West and sauces in Southeast
[Guest]: Asia.
[Guest]: So they have one for every, and they nailed down exactly what evokes that kind of, fantastic.
[Guest]: I mean, somehow whoever came up with that.
[Guest]: And so, for example, there is a, there's an equivalent of this sort of cube or whatever
[Guest]: you get in, say, Nigeria, that Nigerians are absolutely addicted.
[Guest]: And likewise, the Maggi seasoning sauce, Indonesia, you will not find, that's the last thing that
[Guest]: goes on any, you know, Mi Goreng or a Nasi Goreng is that Maggi seasoning sauce, which
[Guest]: is very high umami in soy sauce kind of mix, right?
[Guest]: So likewise, in India, clearly, what they've done is they've kind of taken a combination
[Guest]: broadly of garam masala, which is a very reasonably universal mix of some very common, you know,
[Guest]: fancy spices, you know, black cardamom, green cardamom, you know, cloves, pepper, the expensive
[Guest]: ones, right?
[Guest]: And basically sambar powder, which is essentially coriander, chilies, is what ultimately sort
[Guest]: of is the primary flavor profile of, and fenugreek is the primary flavor profile of sambar, right?
[Guest]: They kind of combine both together, and then you add the garlic powder and dried garlic
[Guest]: powder, dried onion powder, and dried ginger powder, which incidentally, you know, since
[Guest]: we spoke about the whole addiction thing, these are three of some of the most addictive
[Guest]: spice mixes that most Indians don't tend to have in the home kitchen.
[Guest]: Because one, they're very, very volatile, and so people don't think about storing them
[Guest]: in the refrigerator.
[Guest]: But trust me, consumer snacks are addictive because they use onion and garlic powder.
[Guest]: These are actually dehydrated, so they're super concentrated umami bombs, right?
[Guest]: And they're, I mean, they just, so you bite into a chips and you get all that rich flavor
[Guest]: is not by frying real onions and getting that flavor, it's dehydrated onions, right?
[Guest]: And so dried onion, garlic, and ginger powder is generally tends to be there in all snacks,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And then you need some element of sourness, it's typically a kind of an amchur, and then
[Guest]: you need some kind of a starch binder, so that, you know, if you make a mistake by adding
[Guest]: a little bit too much water to your Maggi, the Maggi masala will make sure that it thickens
[Guest]: a bit.
[Guest]: So they've really thought this through fantastically well.
[Guest]: So I'm a huge fan of, I mean, you can literally take any ordinary dish, just sprinkle some
[Guest]: Maggi masala to it, and people will say, Oh, wow, how on earth did you make it?
[Amit Varma]: I said, I just use Maggi masala.
[Amit Varma]: Mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what you should tell them is, I spent eight hours today with a mortar and
[Amit Varma]: pestle just getting this just right.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of chips, you know, I'm reminded of another of the sort of revelations of your
[Amit Varma]: book, which is the reason we've evolved to like things which are crisp is because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, back in prehistoric times, when we lived in caves and all of that, you know, anything
[Amit Varma]: which was fresh was crisp, and therefore, we associate that as, you know, good to eat
[Guest]: and you're...
[Guest]: Yeah, crunch, right?
[Guest]: So crunch, the ability to distinguish crunch is the difference between eating a fresh fruit
[Guest]: versus a rotten fruit that could kill you.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, so clearly, we have a preference for, and the way we detect crunch
[Guest]: is a combination of actually sound, right?
[Guest]: And the other rather interesting thing is that a lot of that crunch that when you bite
[Guest]: into a potato chip, right, or a pani puri, for that matter, is essentially that a lot
[Guest]: of that sound is actually in the ultrasonic range.
[Guest]: It's not in the audible range.
[Guest]: There is some in the audible range, you hear it, but a fair amount of that sound is actually
[Guest]: in the ultrasonic range, which you can't hear, but you can feel it in your bones, right?
[Guest]: Which is why even congenitally deaf people can still experience the crunch of a potato
[Guest]: chip without any loss of taste.
[Amit Varma]: Mind-blowing.
[Amit Varma]: So we are actually responding to food with our bones.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Pretty amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Let's now go on to, you know, the next chapter in your book, which is about the magic color
[Amit Varma]: brown.
[Amit Varma]: And you begin this with this sort of beautiful quote by Sidney Smith, which I loved.
[Amit Varma]: I love the quotes at the start of your chapters, by the way, and this one goes, quote, let
[Amit Varma]: onion atoms lurk within the bowl and half suspected animate the whole, which is fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and then you of course have, you know, another quote shortly after by Julia
[Amit Varma]: Child talking about how it's hard to imagine a civilization without onions and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about onions because after reading this chapter, I felt that, Hey,
[Guest]: what is this?
[Amit Varma]: I don't appreciate onions enough.
[Guest]: It is enough to make me cry.
[Guest]: You know, the other funny thing is that, you know, as I say in the book, India, we don't
[Guest]: even get the best tasting onions.
[Guest]: The variety of onions we grow are actually great for salads in the West.
[Guest]: They're not considered to be cooking onions at all.
[Guest]: So they use the more golden ones that actually are tremendously more flavorful, but slightly
[Guest]: sweeter, which I think probably works for Indians.
[Guest]: But then, you know, one of the things about Indian cooking is the realization that you
[Guest]: can take subpar ingredients and make great food, right?
[Guest]: You know, unlike diametrically opposite Italian food, which if you don't have great quality
[Guest]: ingredients, you can't make great Italian food, right?
[Guest]: And so onions are very central and, you know, we know famously they're all over the news.
[Guest]: The moment the onions prices rise, you know, there's chaos, there's riots, and there's,
[Guest]: you know, all kinds of, it's all over the news, right?
[Guest]: Because literally every part of India, you know, onions, first thing that goes into the
[Guest]: oil, right?
[Guest]: Pretty much, right?
[Guest]: Just despite the fact that on religious days, many Hindus will not eat onions.
[Guest]: And there are obviously, you know, many Brahmins, orthodox Brahmins will not eat onions at all
[Guest]: as they grow older and so on, right?
[Guest]: And definitely not garlic, but definitely onions are also a part of that, that Tamasic
[Guest]: list, if you will.
[Guest]: So onions, first and foremost, are mostly water and they have a ton of flavor without
[Guest]: adding calories.
[Guest]: So it's a very unique package.
[Guest]: And this is if a garlic, for instance, is quite dense, it has a lot less water, right?
[Guest]: Which is why a garlic is usually added after because it's more likely to burn in the pan
[Guest]: because it has less water.
[Guest]: An onion, on the other hand, is just a lot of water, which is why it takes a ton of time
[Guest]: for it to actually brown, right?
[Guest]: Because it has to lose a lot of that water.
[Guest]: Only then will the sugars and the proteins in the onion combine to make those brown colors
[Guest]: as part of the Bayard reaction and so on.
[Guest]: And most people don't have that patient, just get it to translucent stage, which is essentially
[Guest]: when the cell walls lose their structural integrity, that's when it becomes, so it loses
[Guest]: the crispness.
[Guest]: So that's when it becomes translucent.
[Guest]: And then you leave it at that, which is mostly fine, you'll get a mild oniony flavor.
[Guest]: But if you take dishes like, say, a Bhuna, especially like mutton in onions, that onion
[Guest]: needs to be really, really, really brown.
[Guest]: And that, again, it's a classic combination, right?
[Guest]: So there's one of the things I talk about in a subsequent chapter is this idea that
[Guest]: although the Japanese kind of are focused on umami, intuitively, humans have known about
[Guest]: umami pairings globally, right?
[Guest]: Mutton and onions are actually a fantastic umami pairing.
[Guest]: And the reason I call it a pairing is that they're glutamates, and there's another family
[Guest]: of molecules called inosinates.
[Guest]: When you combine glutamates and inosinates, the effect is double that of just one of them
[Guest]: being there.
[Guest]: So that's why people are just so crazy about a really dark, well-cooked mutton gravy, because
[Guest]: it has such that lingering kind of flavor profile.
[Guest]: And it largely, again, doesn't come as much from the mutton as it actually comes from
[Guest]: the completely browned onions there, right?
[Guest]: And so therefore, onions are very, very central.
[Guest]: And essentially, the longer you cook them, the better they taste.
[Guest]: But then you may not want that.
[Guest]: If you're making a very milder dish, by all means, cook it lightly.
[Guest]: But the further you get, the browner it gets, the more tasty it is, but also dangerous,
[Guest]: because it will also burn pretty quickly.
[Guest]: And you can actually take it to the logical level, and you can almost make it a jam, like
[Guest]: an onion jam, right?
[Guest]: A caramelized onion jam, which, by the way, is a fantastic condiment, very underrated.
[Guest]: I realized that when I was in Australia, I realized that they were just crazy about it.
[Guest]: So all burgers in Australia, one of the ingredients there will always be caramelized onion jam,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Which just adds so much flavor to the burger.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and you kind of did point out the technical distinction that what you call caramelized,
[Amit Varma]: what we call caramelized onion is actually maillarded onion.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you had a lot to say about sort of the magical maillard reaction.
[Unknown]: Oh, yes, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that and why it is so central to food.
[Guest]: So basically, we've known for a while that if you cook food above the boiling point of
[Guest]: water, between a certain range, food becomes brown, right?
[Guest]: It takes on these brown colors, right?
[Guest]: For a long while, we didn't quite know what's exactly happening.
[Guest]: We kind of knew that there are some, clearly some chemical reactions happening.
[Guest]: So you know, you have to realize that as long as you're cooking inside water, right, a lot
[Guest]: of the changes are not major chemical reactions at all.
[Guest]: In that, see, gelatinization is more a rearrangement of structure rather than a major chemical
[Guest]: change itself.
[Guest]: Maillard reaction is actually where things are breaking down into other bunch of families
[Guest]: of molecules, because that's when you have enough heat to actually break down stuff,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So as long as water is there, none of that is happening.
[Guest]: So what happens between 110 and 170 Celsius is what this Louis Cabille Maillard, this
[Guest]: French chemist, he kind of started documenting that he found that a family of six or seven
[Guest]: families of molecules, which are fantastically aromatic and also lend that characteristic
[Guest]: brown color to food, right?
[Guest]: And then depending on, and the fact that you can only do this if your food has both proteins
[Guest]: and sugars, which is why you can't deep fry just a raw piece of chicken, right?
[Guest]: Deep frying is also a Maillard reaction.
[Guest]: It's just that it's happening at the higher end.
[Guest]: So you want to instantaneously dehydrate, but you're still browning, right?
[Guest]: Fresh chicken does not have sugars.
[Guest]: So that's where you have to bread it.
[Guest]: So you have to take it and then you have to add it some kind of starch, which is again
[Guest]: sugars, which therefore will then react with the protein and the meat.
[Guest]: And then that's how you make fried chicken, right?
[Guest]: That's where we use batters in general.
[Guest]: So anything that does not have enough of either proteins or starches will use a batter, right?
[Guest]: So that, you know, you are able to, or egg for that matter, right?
[Guest]: So you can use egg plus breadcrumbs or whatever, right?
[Guest]: So essentially the Maillard reaction produces a family of molecules that can take very,
[Guest]: very seemingly boring ingredients, like, you know, as I described, a cabbage, right?
[Guest]: Which everyone hates, because if you steam a cabbage, it smells very bad because it generates
[Guest]: hydrogen sulfide gas and that's why you should not steam cabbage and it will naturally steam
[Guest]: if you have a small vessel and you're cutting a ton of cabbage, it will steam.
[Guest]: So unfortunately the only way to cook cabbage in a way that is not steam is to cook a small
[Guest]: amount in a big pan, which is usually impractical.
[Guest]: So almost always cabbage is going to smell bad, right?
[Guest]: But on the other hand, if you actually cook cabbage to well past 110 Celsius, right, as
[Guest]: it starts to get caramelized, caramelized or, you know, Maillard, you know, cabbage,
[Guest]: if you will, is just insanely tasty, right?
[Guest]: So in fact, I learned this from a Russian recipe where they actually say the way they
[Guest]: eat cabbage is by caramelizing it for like half an hour, 45 minutes it takes in just
[Guest]: olive oil or some oil and just let it slow cook and then it'll slowly lose all the water,
[Guest]: get really brown and it'll produce fantastic flavors all by itself, right?
[Guest]: So this is definitely, this is essentially the realization here is that you can simply
[Guest]: become a better cook by learning something that restaurants tend to do, right?
[Guest]: If you're making a gravy, realizing that you can't get the Maillard reaction going because
[Guest]: it's a gravy.
[Guest]: So to get the advantages of all of the flavors, the core ingredients are sauteed or fried
[Guest]: separately and then added because they're brown.
[Guest]: And so they bring all that flavor and then you add it to the gravy.
[Guest]: So aloo gobi made in a restaurant is aloo and gobi separately deep fried and then added
[Guest]: to the gravy, right?
[Guest]: So likewise, pretty much anything else, right?
[Guest]: So I think, so that's one, you know, key thing and also the realization that deep frying
[Guest]: is also the Maillard reaction, except very rapid with the intent of actually dehydrating
[Guest]: the surface so that it becomes crisp and prevents oil from getting inside.
[Guest]: Otherwise it will be greasy, right?
[Guest]: So, which is why if you're making puri and the temperature is well below 170 Celsius,
[Guest]: the outside is not going to dehydrate fast enough.
[Guest]: So the oil is going to get inside.
[Guest]: So you get greasy puri.
[Guest]: But if you precisely keep the temperature at between 175 and 180 Celsius, it will just
[Guest]: get perfectly crisp on the outside.
[Guest]: And so that the inside does not undergo the Maillard reaction, it's only undergoing steaming,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So that's exactly what you want.
[Guest]: So deep frying is Maillard reaction only on the outside and starch gelatinization inside.
[Amit Varma]: So that's basically what the principles of Maillard reaction.
[Amit Varma]: Pretty stunning.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about cabbages, I mean, I totally empathize with that because I've
[Amit Varma]: hated cabbages all my life, though if I ever have the patience, I might attempt them this
[Amit Varma]: way or maybe not, but I was kind of struck.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason we've hated it obviously is that one, you know, we cook it the wrong way
[Amit Varma]: and often we overcook it.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a quote from this chapter, which is a little bit of a tangent, but I did want
[Amit Varma]: to ask you about that, which is, quote, we overcook vegetables, cook meat till it's drier
[Amit Varma]: than the surface of the moon.
[Amit Varma]: And we like our eggs boiled harder than Pantera's music.
[Amit Varma]: However, we compensate for all of that with a flavor-bombing strategy that has no parallel
[Amit Varma]: anywhere else in the world, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me when I read this that this flavor-bombing strategy as such, though we've
[Amit Varma]: made a feature out of it and not a bug, may be a jugaadu way of covering up for bad cooking.
[Amit Varma]: But are we kind of stuck here?
[Amit Varma]: Because now because of nostalgia, I won't say our tastes have evolved because I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I obviously don't mean the technical sense of the term, but we have grown to like certain
[Amit Varma]: kinds of food, certain kinds of food have, which are flavor-bombed food, have become
[Amit Varma]: our comfort food, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: Is Indian cuisine therefore stuck in this equilibrium where it doesn't matter how you
[Amit Varma]: cook something as long as you get the spices right?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think so.
[Guest]: One is that it's important to note that this strategy per se made perfect sense in a pre-refrigeration
[Guest]: India, which is essentially 30 years ago, till 30 years ago, for the most part, refrigerators
[Guest]: were not common.
[Guest]: And so, and refrigeration was not common, not just in your home, it wasn't even common
[Guest]: in stores.
[Guest]: So in general, if you're in urban India, you have absolutely no guarantee how fresh the
[Guest]: vegetables are, how fresh the meat is, how salmonella laden the eggs are, and what pesticides
[Guest]: were used to cover the palak or the vegetables to prevent them from being completely mauled
[Guest]: by those insects, so that they survive till they actually get to your table in a city.
[Guest]: And the nearest place where they're growing the crops from your city is several hundred
[Guest]: kilometers away.
[Guest]: So in that kind of world, urban Indian middle class kind of cooking, since all of these
[Guest]: are unknown, and you have no control over all of these, I think the strategy makes sense,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So you do not want underboiled eggs.
[Guest]: You absolutely want to make sure till it's green between the yolk and the whites.
[Guest]: So likewise, you do not want to undercook vegetables, you do not want to eat salads,
[Guest]: because you don't know what pesticides went in, there's no controls.
[Guest]: And again, there's a theme from your podcast that I've heard so many times, look, state
[Guest]: doesn't have the capacity to ensure these kinds of things, right?
[Guest]: And in a sense that so, and we're a very low trust society.
[Guest]: So we don't trust any of this.
[Guest]: So the only way to, so it might seem jugaadu, but it makes perfect sense in that sense.
[Guest]: You're right, in the sense that it ends up building a memory, and a fondness and a nostalgia
[Guest]: for a specific kind of cooking, if you will, right?
[Guest]: But that's not too different from, say, the Chinese idea of stir frying food, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, you heard the fact that the reason they end up stir frying food is
[Guest]: because they had a fuel shortage, cooking fuel was short, and so all cooking had to
[Guest]: happen at ultra high temperatures in very short amount of time, you know, they didn't
[Guest]: sit and do, you know, broths, like the Japanese did, you know, and so on.
[Guest]: So a lot of that cooking had to happen in a flash, right?
[Guest]: And so, but you would argue that, you know, a lot of Chinese cooking has in some sense
[Guest]: taken that constraint and evolved that way, although they have no such shortage, no.
[Guest]: So I think that it's possible to take this strategy, and still make great, adventurous,
[Guest]: creative new Indian food, by perhaps using great fresh organic ingredients, but toning
[Guest]: down the spices, and really, over time, building the taste.
[Guest]: And I can already see this in some of the experimental restaurants that are definitely
[Guest]: coming up outside of India, definitely in the likes of London and Toronto, where tons
[Guest]: of Indians, the Bay Area, New York, and so on, Australia and others, Singapore, for that
[Guest]: matter, but also in the likes of Bombay and Delhi, at least catering to the uber rich,
[Guest]: you're starting to see this wave of, I don't want it, you know, this oily and this high
[Guest]: on masala, right?
[Guest]: In fact, a lot of home, the common complaint about restaurant food, it's too spicy, and
[Guest]: it's too oily.
[Guest]: They're both that way, because one, you know, anything less would have been unhealthy, would
[Guest]: have killed you, could cause you food poisoning, and so on, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think we can still evolve over time, definitely as people are more conscious
[Guest]: about it, and perhaps people move towards hopefully trying to see if they have the privilege
[Guest]: enough to be able to source fresher ingredients, you know, local, all of these, you know, you
[Guest]: have urban farms are now a common thing, Chennai has a ton of these places, that literally
[Guest]: just 10 kilometers away, there are people growing stuff in greenhouses, and shipping
[Guest]: it to you, you know, weekly subscription, and I get a bunch of these leaves and small
[Guest]: cucumbers and carrots, which are tastier than the giant carrots that I get in the supermarket.
[Guest]: I think as slowly as we develop a taste for that, we'll do that.
[Guest]: But I would also say that, if you look at rural India, that's not the case.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, a lot of rural styles of cooking, one of my favorite, I often follow
[Guest]: a lot of these YouTube channels, these rural, this is 90 year old grandmother cooking, say
[Guest]: this sort of a goat in rural Andhra and so on.
[Guest]: And you're struck by the fact that they don't overcook at all, right?
[Guest]: They're actually they use absolutely literally, they walk over, you know, grab the coriander,
[Guest]: they grab the gongura, literally fresh of spring onion from the ground and so on.
[Guest]: And they wash it and it's literally made, they don't overcook in that situation.
[Guest]: So I would think that this is a very urban phenomenon, but I'm sure we can probably get
[Guest]: past it over time.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also, I didn't mean to come across as too judgmental when I spoke about it as
[Amit Varma]: being Jugaru, because another way of looking at it, like you spoke about how all Chinese
[Amit Varma]: cuisine might have evolved from this original set of constraints and this delightful diversity
[Amit Varma]: of cuisines that we have across the world is in a sense, comes about as a response to
[Amit Varma]: the different kinds of constraints that operate everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you know, would we have learned to use spices in such subtle and delightful
[Amit Varma]: ways if not for these constraints?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Who knows?
[Guest]: Plus the fact that, you know, almost all of the spices in the world grow in a very tiny
[Guest]: part of the world, right?
[Guest]: Literally the Malabar coast and a few islands in Indonesia.
[Guest]: That's it, right?
[Guest]: And maybe now Vietnam and Thailand are also starting to grow pepper and a few other things.
[Guest]: But so in a sense that the very fact that they are now, the fact that pepper is now
[Guest]: a common ingredient literally everywhere in the world is by itself a fascinating story.
[Guest]: And the fact that it is the the expensiveness and the impracticality of growing pepper all
[Guest]: over India is apparently one of the reasons why chilies became popular, right?
[Guest]: So, you know, so one of the things I often am fascinated about is that once a year we
[Guest]: have this, so it's one day, one religious festival in my family where it's pretty common
[Guest]: here where you kind of remember your ancestors, right?
[Guest]: So three generations of ancestors, you remember them.
[Guest]: So there's a, there's a, there's a haven that's done and so on.
[Guest]: And the food that is cooked on that day is very special.
[Guest]: There's a very specific set of recipes, which they say is that, you know, there's been,
[Guest]: we've been doing this on this day, always this is cooked and the recipes are quite fascinating
[Guest]: because they don't have tomatoes, chilies, in fact, they actually don't have any ingredients
[Guest]: that were not available in India 300 years ago, right?
[Guest]: So it's very yam based, it's colocasia, it's ginger and pepper, turmeric, heavy kind of
[Guest]: food.
[Guest]: It tastes, the flavor profile is just entirely different, right?
[Guest]: It's actually quite, kind of burns your throat because it's mostly ginger and pepper, right?
[Guest]: No garlic, no onion, no, none of the, you know, new world spices, you know, chilies
[Guest]: and tomatoes and so on, right?
[Guest]: And no potatoes, right?
[Guest]: So they use a raw banana and these other native yams and starches.
[Guest]: So what is fascinating is that, when I go to my wife's hometown, their houses actually
[Guest]: have these big jackfruit trees and other trees.
[Guest]: So some of them actually have the pepper vines growing around those trees.
[Guest]: So pepper is actually vine, right?
[Guest]: So it doesn't like, you can't just cultivate like that.
[Guest]: So it literally has to grow around a tree.
[Guest]: And the green pepper, which comes straight out of the vine, is actually pretty sharply
[Guest]: hot.
[Guest]: I mean, it has that little bit of the heat that you would associate with the green chili,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But then you sun dry it.
[Guest]: And then what you ultimately get is that shriveled black thing that has a different flavor profile.
[Guest]: It has a slightly more smokier, different flavor profile, but the fresh green pepper
[Guest]: is actually a way to add actual heat to food, except that it was, you know, out of, it was
[Guest]: very expensive.
[Guest]: It only grow in a specific season, not available unless you're living in that part of India
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Chilies, on the other hand, can grow anywhere in India, right?
[Guest]: It's a plant from Mexico.
[Guest]: You, you essentially plant it and one chili plant will give one household more chilies
[Guest]: than they will eat, right?
[Guest]: You know, I'm growing chilies in the terrace and we don't know what to do with those chilies.
[Guest]: It is just incredibly sort of productive plant as well.
[Guest]: So it's, it's, it's actually quite fascinating how sometimes these plants also, right, I
[Guest]: mean, having traveled all the way from here, they find this new home and they completely
[Guest]: dominate and change the cuisine over time, right?
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, I'm thinking of a Corona virus, like I would imagine that chilies have a very
[Amit Varma]: high R as it were, let's move on to your next chapter, which is about acid and sourness
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And here again, I was struck by this sort of delightful metaphor of music that you use,
[Amit Varma]: where you spoke about salt being like a volume knob and sourness being like the bass guitarist
[Amit Varma]: in a band that before that you have maybe salt and sweet and you have singer and your
[Amit Varma]: regular guitar, but it's not fun and then suddenly you have a bass guitar and the mix
[Amit Varma]: and the whole thing just goes wide open.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, acid, about sourness, how we evolve to kind of like
[Amit Varma]: it and, you know, how we should think of acid in fact.
[Guest]: So obviously, I think the one inspiration obviously for this particular chapter was
[Guest]: Samin Nosrat's fantastic Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat, which kind of explains the four key
[Guest]: things that you need to understand about good cooking and so on.
[Guest]: Acid is, often people tend to understand salt, people tend to understand fat, people tend
[Guest]: to understand heat.
[Guest]: Often don't think of sourness, the average person does not associate sourness with acid
[Guest]: at all, right?
[Guest]: Because acid is always that dangerous sulphuric acid and it has that sort of image, right?
[Guest]: So obviously what I wanted to sort of say that actually it is one of the single most
[Guest]: important things in cooking simply because if your food does not have that slight amount
[Guest]: of sourness, you know, in three scientific terms, if the pH is not less than seven, it's
[Guest]: actually going to taste bland, right?
[Guest]: Your grandmother knew this because she would make dal, which is notoriously bland, then
[Guest]: she would squeeze lime juice right at the end and that will just elevate the whole thing.
[Guest]: You make a pulao, which is just rice, then you would squeeze lime juice at the end and
[Guest]: it just, you know, magically changes the whole thing, right?
[Guest]: Even when you marinate meat, for instance, the acid acts as a tenderizer, right?
[Guest]: So it sort of, you know, breaks the structures on the skin of the meat that makes it easier
[Guest]: for the flavor molecules to stick to it, right, on the surface, right?
[Guest]: That's why we squeeze, that's why we use yogurt, which is an acid, right?
[Guest]: And I think, you know, so part of what I wanted to do is to first and foremost kind of get
[Guest]: into people's heads that look, many of the things that you commonly use, everything from
[Guest]: tea to coffee to yogurt to tamarind to lime juice to vinegar, they're all acids, right?
[Guest]: In varying strengths, your sulfuric acid is the one, the extreme end of the spectrum,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And the reason why we have such a tremendous bias towards acids is because the base or
[Guest]: the alkaline side of it is associated with poisons, is associated with bitterness, right?
[Guest]: So sour and bitter are opposite tastes, right?
[Guest]: And because we have evolved taste buds to detect alkaloids, which is essentially what
[Guest]: bitterness is, because they're poisonous, we therefore have evolved a bias against most
[Guest]: alkaline food, right?
[Guest]: Which is why, you know, baking soda, if you overuse baking soda in something, you get
[Guest]: that nasty metallic feeling because it's the kind of taste your body is not used to liking,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Also why people have this thing against baking soda as well, right?
[Guest]: But if you use it in the right amount, it's quite useful.
[Guest]: But yeah, so therefore acids essentially is about adding sourness, right?
[Guest]: And sourness has a fantastic, the reason I use bass guitar as a metaphor is actually
[Guest]: an interesting story.
[Guest]: I mean, I grew up in the, in the nineties, like you did, and you know, I, as someone
[Guest]: who sort of, I was living in North India.
[Guest]: So I was listening to Anu Malik on the one hand, and I was listening to A. R. Rahman
[Guest]: and L. A. Raja on the other end.
[Guest]: And it struck me, no one refused to frustrate me that Bollywood music in the nineties had
[Guest]: no bass guitar, right?
[Guest]: Or it was inaudible for most part.
[Guest]: If at all they were using a bass guitar, it was a synth and you couldn't really hear it.
[Guest]: And music without a bass guitar is, is just, is, is missing the meat, if you will, right?
[Guest]: It's, it's somehow you don't get those bass notes.
[Guest]: That's what really anchors you.
[Guest]: Bass is what is the bridge between your melody and the percussion.
[Guest]: And if you don't have it, the drums sound tinny and cheap, and then your melody just
[Guest]: stands out.
[Guest]: You know, it doesn't really mix together.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And given the fact that L. A. Raja was like a God of using bass and particularly bass
[Guest]: guitar, he would never use synth bass.
[Guest]: He would almost always use a actual bass guitar.
[Guest]: And again, mind you that it was at a time when cassette players and so on, um, what
[Guest]: tiny, right.
[Guest]: And to hear bass, you need large speakers, right?
[Guest]: It's a size thing, right?
[Guest]: So you need the larger tweeter or subwoofer to be able to hear bass.
[Guest]: And so it was quite natural that a lot of musicians would compensate by using a higher
[Guest]: frequency so that you can actually at least hear it.
[Guest]: And Bollywood music directors just skipped it saying that you can't hear it anyway.
[Guest]: I'm not going to, I'm going to skip it.
[Guest]: L. A. Raja, on the other hand, would use bass tuned one octave higher so that you could
[Guest]: still hear it.
[Guest]: Um, even on your Walkman or, or a Shady transistor radio, you could still hear that thing that
[Guest]: kind of connected between the melody and, and the percussion.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Um, and so in that sense, for me, the reason I'm particularly attached to that sort of
[Guest]: metaphor is because sourness is exactly that, right?
[Guest]: Because sweetness and saltiness are very one dimensional, right?
[Guest]: They, something that's just sweet is just cloyingly sweet.
[Guest]: Something that's just salt is, is, you know, it's a one dimensional taste, but something
[Guest]: with these two and a bit of acid is just something else altogether.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And often I think, you know, the best example I often like to give is that when it comes
[Guest]: to Indian cooking, we are an absolute, we understand acids better than most cuisines.
[Guest]: We use more variety of acids than most other cuisines, right?
[Guest]: And nothing represents the pinnacle of the youth creative use of acids than chart, right?
[Guest]: I mean, chart, chart, in fact, not just acids, there's the heat as well, which sort of gives
[Guest]: you the dopamine because chart is spicy for that reason.
[Guest]: Um, the crunchiness, the texture variations, right?
[Guest]: So you have soft aloo and those kinds of things, and you have the crunch of the papadi and
[Guest]: all these other things.
[Guest]: So you have the textural variations and you have like four kinds of acids, right?
[Guest]: The tomatoes are mildly acidic.
[Guest]: Uh, the tamarind is sort of like the base strong acid.
[Guest]: Then the lime juice squeezed at the end is the top note, if you will think of it like
[Guest]: an orchestra, right?
[Guest]: And then the amchur is the more sophisticated acid.
[Guest]: So that again, added kind of bridges everything together.
[Guest]: So literally four kinds of acids used in a, in a single dish, right?
[Guest]: So that's why chart is delicious and we're kind of addicted to it as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, my favorite objective in the book was this objectivated compound you use for the
[Amit Varma]: flavor of chart, where you referred to as disco party in the mouth flavor, which is
[Amit Varma]: fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: And again, you, you spoke about tamarind as drummer plus bass, amchur as lead guitar,
[Amit Varma]: citrus, like lead vocalist, which I absolutely love.
[Amit Varma]: I want you to elaborate on this very intriguing, uh, sentence, which, uh, uh, I love, but didn't
[Amit Varma]: fully understand.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd ask you to kind of explain it to me now, which is good when recipes call for tomato
[Amit Varma]: puree, noobs at tomato puree, experts at tomato paste and legends at tomato ketchup, stop
[Guest]: good.
[Guest]: So this is, you know, so this is again, stems from the fact that, um, uh, tomatoes are notoriously
[Guest]: temperamental.
[Guest]: Um, I mean, they're very seasonal.
[Guest]: So the flavor of the tomato varies by season.
[Guest]: Um, the tastiest tomatoes come with summer, winter tomatoes are bland.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Uh, so the, the summer tomatoes are a much sour, right?
[Guest]: And again, depending on the variety.
[Guest]: So there are tomatoes that are also sweet and strongly sweet.
[Guest]: What's sweet and sour is the ideal one, um, uh, and so on, right?
[Guest]: So therefore, if, if, if you're looking to get a certain level of sourness in your dish
[Guest]: and you're relying on tomatoes for it, it's almost always going to be a tricky thing.
[Guest]: So almost always most Indian dishes don't rely only on tomatoes, which is why they'll
[Guest]: always either add tamarind, they'll add other kinds of acids because you can't rely just
[Guest]: on tomatoes for sourness.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Um, and so, but tomatoes on the other hand, have a ton of umami flavor, right?
[Guest]: And you get that out and tomatoes are mostly water and you're not going to get much unless
[Guest]: you're able to reduce the tomatoes down to lose as much water as possible.
[Guest]: So if you find some of the best cooks on YouTube and so on, right, like I give some examples
[Guest]: like Nisha Madhulika is another one, right, so she almost always, you cook that, you cut
[Guest]: tomatoes and you cook it down till it loses, they'll tell you that till it loses so much
[Guest]: water that you can see the oil come through the sides, right?
[Guest]: So that's usually a visual aid at understanding that you've not make, make, make it.
[Guest]: So the more concentrated the tomato is, the tastier it's going to be.
[Guest]: In fact, you can take it to the logical extreme.
[Guest]: Some of the pasta sauces in Italy are cooked for 28, 24 to 48 hours.
[Guest]: You can endlessly cook tomatoes that the longer you cook, the tastier it becomes, right?
[Guest]: As long as you stop short of burning it and so on, right?
[Guest]: And so therefore, so obviously tomato puree means you are just, you know, taking the tomatoes,
[Guest]: putting it in a, in a mixie, making it into a liquid and then using it.
[Guest]: That's tomato puree, but it's going to be not really tasty.
[Guest]: You're not going to make it lose a lot of the water.
[Guest]: On the other hand, tomato paste is concentrated.
[Guest]: It's already lost a lot of the, it's already been dehydrated and a little bit of tomato
[Guest]: paste is the equivalent of four or five tomatoes, which otherwise is painful for you to sit
[Guest]: and cut and add, right?
[Guest]: So adding tomato paste is a much, much reliable way to get the core tomato flavor.
[Guest]: So if you're making like tomato soup, if you're trying to make this just with actual fresh
[Guest]: tomatoes, you're going to get a very disappointing soup.
[Guest]: So you will need a tomato paste kind of thing.
[Guest]: Tomato ketchup on the other hand is tomato paste plus garlic powder, onion powder, and
[Guest]: all those other magically addictive and vinegar, which is also acid, a stronger acid.
[Guest]: All of that put together, onion powder, garlic powder, and tomato paste, and a bunch of other
[Guest]: spices and salt and sugar.
[Guest]: And so it is really, it's designed to be addictive, which is why people like eating anything with
[Guest]: the tomato ketchup, right?
[Guest]: It's the most popular condiment around the world, right?
[Guest]: And so, and the reason I say legend is because look, if you're like me or like anyone else
[Guest]: ordering from Swiggy three or four days of the week during the pandemic, you're going
[Guest]: to have a ton of sachets sitting around with every one of those orders.
[Guest]: And trust me, if you're throwing them away, you're wasting some of them.
[Guest]: It's the most fantastic condiment, any recipe that calls for tomatoes, just open up one
[Guest]: of those sachets and trust me, it'll just elevate your cooking.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I remember some very old essay by I think Malcolm Gladwell on tomato ketchup where
[Amit Varma]: he spoke about how one of the reasons it's so popular is it's a combination of all the
[Amit Varma]: different flavor profiles, including umami.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk a bit about umami.
[Amit Varma]: You've already kind of mentioned that, you know, it not just accentuates the flavor of
[Amit Varma]: anything else, but it lingers for a longer time and how, you know, Japanese cooking can
[Amit Varma]: be minimal with few ingredients because, you know, whatever flavor is there is given that
[Amit Varma]: much more depth by umami.
[Amit Varma]: And I was kind of, you know, another myth which you sort of busted here, which so many
[Amit Varma]: people believe is that MSG is bad and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, I'll quote you again, quote, there is no chemical difference between
[Amit Varma]: the glutamates in cabbage, mushrooms and tomato and the half teaspoon of ajinomoto that you
[Amit Varma]: sprinkle on fried rice, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, as you said, parmesan itself has more glutamates and an equivalent amount
[Amit Varma]: of ajinomoto and, you know, which among us westernized elites can resist sprinkling of
[Amit Varma]: parmesan.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about kind of umami and what's the big deal about it?
[Amit Varma]: And what is still the lingering mystery around it because, you know, it's.
[Guest]: So we kind of, you know, so the lingering mystery is fundamentally coming from the fact
[Guest]: that as a, as a taste bud, we've only known it for about a hundred years or so, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we didn't know that we had a taste bud for umami specifically.
[Guest]: And the mystery is also the fact that we still don't know for absolutely sure why we have
[Guest]: it, right?
[Guest]: There are some very popular theories, which I'll talk about, but it's not like, it's not
[Guest]: like done and dusted, you know, science, right?
[Guest]: Because you know, like we explained, we, we know why we need sugar.
[Guest]: It's just, we need it to live, right?
[Guest]: We know why we need salt and we know why we need the ability to detect acids or bitterness
[Guest]: and alkalis and so on.
[Guest]: So, you know, we've been wondering why is there a taste bud for umami?
[Guest]: And exactly what is umami?
[Guest]: It's a set of sensors, taste buds, that detect a very specific amino acid in food.
[Guest]: Not all amino acids, only one amino acid, which is why it's odd, right?
[Guest]: So one of the right now most explained, I mean, right now it's a partially accepted
[Guest]: theory is the fact that it is ultimately a taste for protein.
[Guest]: So you have to remember that protein is not very tasty.
[Guest]: Protein is actually, it doesn't taste like sugar, right?
[Guest]: It doesn't taste like fat.
[Guest]: It doesn't taste like sugar.
[Guest]: Protein is the least tasty of the foods.
[Guest]: And it's possibly one of the most important because you know, all the rest of your body,
[Guest]: your growth and muscular growth and everything else requires proteins, right?
[Guest]: And your body can't synthesize all amino acids.
[Guest]: Make it only synthesize some and some amino acids are essential, which means that they
[Guest]: have to come as part of your diet, right?
[Guest]: And this is also why, so, and some of these essential amino acids are available only in
[Guest]: animal sources, which is why even vegetarian or most people who don't eat meat still will
[Guest]: eat dairy and others because that's where you get the other amino acids from.
[Guest]: Although technically vegan diets now, there's apparently soy does have some of these essential
[Guest]: amino acids, one of the few plants that does.
[Guest]: So if you make soy protein, you're mostly okay.
[Guest]: But if you are vegan and do not eat soy, then I think there's a serious problem.
[Guest]: And again, if you're a child on a vegan diet, it's a serious problem because it's not going
[Guest]: to be enough.
[Guest]: So anyway, so that's the nutrition which we would skip.
[Guest]: But essentially the prevailing theory is that because meat is raw meat, the taste of raw
[Guest]: meat is, evokes disgust, right?
[Guest]: So we've developed taste as we were like, you know, cavemen and so on, the ability to
[Guest]: eat raw meat, right?
[Guest]: And to do that, apparently our tongue has a way of detecting this particular amino acid.
[Guest]: Obviously, the gap in the story is the fact that why not other amino acids?
[Guest]: Why only this?
[Guest]: And that too, glutamic acid as an amino acid is not an essential amino acid.
[Guest]: So that's also there.
[Guest]: So it must be said, right?
[Guest]: So therefore, we seem to have this ability to detect glutamates, glutamic acid, in food,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And at the moment we detected, it has that sort of lingering.
[Guest]: So the way it works is that the umami receptors amp up the salt and sweet sourness receptors,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So a tiny amount of sourness in a umami laden broth will taste a lot more sour than a non-umami
[Guest]: based one, which has a ton more acid.
[Guest]: So this is where you can get away with adding less.
[Guest]: So this is that.
[Guest]: So second is the fact that your body, because we are made up of the same set of amino acids,
[Guest]: I think I don't know the number, I think 14 or something.
[Guest]: So we have about two kgs of glutamates in our body, our muscles and our body.
[Guest]: If you take, you know, if you take a 70 kg person, two kgs of glutamates are there.
[Guest]: So that one quarter teaspoon of MSG is not going to kill you, because it's just simple
[Guest]: statistics.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And the fact that natural umami is really no different from the synthetic one.
[Guest]: That said, there are a tiny proportion of people who are allergic to synthetic ajinomoto,
[Guest]: a tiny, tiny number.
[Guest]: But that's much, much tinier than people who are actually say gluten allergic or have celiac
[Guest]: disease and so on.
[Guest]: So, so therefore, that's the thing about umami.
[Guest]: And as I said, I think Indian cuisine is not focused as much on it.
[Guest]: But again, even there, there is an urban bias and I kind of point this out in the book.
[Guest]: A lot of coastal, poorer fisher folk, etc, a lot of their cuisine is pretty umami heavy.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Because the tinier the fish, the more umami heavy it is going to be.
[Guest]: So they eat the bigger, less tasty fish, but they eat the tiny dried fish and so on.
[Guest]: Second thing that adds umami to food is fermentation.
[Guest]: And the northeast of India has a lot, a bigger fermentation tradition of using actually fermented
[Guest]: foods than the rest of India.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I think at some point of time, certain kinds of fermentation began to be considered unacceptable
[Guest]: from a caste system purity standpoint, because obviously, because, you know, production of
[Guest]: alcohol is also fermentation.
[Guest]: So on.
[Guest]: So there is that, you know, which is why most of India does not have a vinegar tradition
[Guest]: because we don't like alcohol.
[Guest]: So we will ban all of those kinds of things.
[Guest]: And you can't have vinegar without an alcohol, you know, being produced first.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So vinegar is literally just sour wine, right?
[Guest]: But you do in Goa and you do in the coast of India where there is amongst non-Hindu
[Guest]: populations amongst Christians and others.
[Guest]: So vinegar is a very big thing in Goa.
[Guest]: Also coconut vinegar, also in coastal Karnataka and Kerala as well.
[Guest]: So that's essentially umami.
[Guest]: They've always done it.
[Guest]: So mutton and onions is another fantastic pairing.
[Guest]: Tomatoes in anything is concentrated.
[Guest]: Tomato is very, very high on umami.
[Guest]: Any kind of concentrated base gravy that has tomato is going to be very umami and so on.
[Amit Varma]: I'm kind of reminded of this old cartoon.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know if it was a cartoon or an anecdote or whatever, but it basically features
[Amit Varma]: this aristocratic English lady telling her companion and talking about, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: domestic health and saying, do these people also have sex?
[Amit Varma]: It is entirely too good for them.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in an Indian context, it would seem that the lower you go down the class
[Amit Varma]: or the caste chain, you're actually getting more umami.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, they're actually better off in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also fascinating that we are 2kg glutamates.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, after reading your book, it seems to me that human beings are basically
[Amit Varma]: water plus MSG.
[Guest]: So we're mostly water, but you know, so the other, you know, since you brought up that
[Guest]: aristocratic lady, right?
[Guest]: So there's actually a, even in England, right, or even in Europe, right?
[Guest]: If you, if you think about this modern day phenomenon of sourdough baking and that kind
[Guest]: of crusty artisanal brown whole wheat kind of breads, which are now what hipsters eat
[Guest]: now, right?
[Guest]: You know, three, 400 years ago, that was considered to be peasant food.
[Guest]: That bleached white, perfect sandwich loaf was what the rich people ate.
[Guest]: And you know, obviously it's the same thing, right?
[Guest]: They've realized that that's actually that crusty artisanal long fermented natural sourdough
[Guest]: bread is tastier than that fast fermented bleached white flour bread is a realization
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, we've, we've come too much later.
[Amit Varma]: Mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And, and another sort of, uh, another great villain of, uh, you know, in Indian culture,
[Amit Varma]: which should not be a villain, uh, at all is a baking soda, as you point out.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a misconception that I held as well.
[Amit Varma]: I always knew MSG was perfectly fine, but I always thought that, Hey, you know, restaurants
[Amit Varma]: mess up our food.
[Amit Varma]: They put too much baking soda and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: They're taking shortcuts.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But, uh, you know, after reading your book, I have looked at baking soda with new eyes.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about, you know, why that misconception exists and why it is actually
[Amit Varma]: such an incredibly useful ingredient.
[Guest]: See, I think there's a, there's a certain, uh, the bias against baking soda is no different
[Guest]: from the wider, slightly more fallacious, uh, bias in Indian culture in general against
[Guest]: anything chemical, which is a very odd thing.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, so apparently sodium chloride is not chemical, but sodium bicarbonate is chemical, right?
[Guest]: But, uh, but then, you know, so, so the whole, so there is that, right?
[Guest]: Because obviously it is.
[Guest]: Uh, and the other thing is that, you know, you can collect salt by, you can make salt
[Guest]: by evaporating seawater and you get a sense that it's, it's natural, although salt is
[Guest]: the only thing that is not of organic origin that we eat.
[Guest]: It is literally the only thing of non-organic origin that we eat.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Um, so because it comes from the oceans and so on.
[Guest]: So the other thing is baking soda, so there is that larger chemical thing.
[Guest]: The second thing is that, uh, obviously, you know, as a historically predominantly poor
[Guest]: country and so on, you know, your, uh, your low end restaurants, your, your low end food
[Guest]: outlets and so on.
[Guest]: I mean, they, they need to find ways to save on fuel.
[Guest]: There's just no getting around.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Um, and by the way, you know, we know how those guys operate, you know, they figured
[Guest]: out some guys, they get a domestic cylinder and that's how all the, all the cooking happens.
[Guest]: So none of those guys are paying like commercial cylinder rates and so on.
[Guest]: It's somebody's a cylinder that they're using and so on.
[Guest]: So the Jugaad is there everywhere in that industry.
[Guest]: And so it is not surprising, therefore, that they would have figured out that using baking
[Guest]: soda is a fantastic way to reduce fuel costs because baking soda will reduce the amount
[Guest]: of time that it takes dal to cook.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Especially legumes, uh, grains to an extent, but legumes definitely, right.
[Guest]: If you are cooking China, a pot of China, right.
[Guest]: Using a pinch of baking soda will cut the cooking time by 50%.
[Guest]: That is a lot of money over time.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And obviously, I mean, the only thing is that over time, we've also figured out that you
[Guest]: can balance that out by adding tea, right.
[Guest]: I didn't tea bags, which is why when you make China masala, you add both little bit of baking
[Guest]: soda and you add tea.
[Guest]: People only remember the fact that I'm adding tea because it gives the brown color.
[Guest]: That's not what it is for.
[Guest]: Tea is an acid.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And more importantly, it's an acid that only becomes acidic at high temperatures.
[Guest]: So, which is why just the tea bag is not acidic.
[Guest]: Only once the temperature goes above a certain level is when, you know, tea becomes acidic
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So the reason it exists is because in the early part of the cooking process, you want
[Guest]: the baking soda to break all of the walls of the China so that it actually cooks it
[Guest]: faster because baking soda breaks down pectin, which is, which is part of the cell walls
[Guest]: of all plants.
[Guest]: And what happens is that then the tea kicks in and neutralizes any leftover baking soda
[Guest]: because acids and bases react and you get, you know, carbon dioxide and water.
[Guest]: So therefore, that's why we use this and restaurants will use it pretty liberally in most things
[Guest]: that they're cooking because it's also common that they don't quite know all of these reactions.
[Guest]: So there's a good chance that they're probably using it when cooking rice, when cooking literally
[Guest]: anything because they think that if it works for China, it'll work for anything.
[Guest]: They'll add it when cooking meat, they'll add it.
[Guest]: So it's, it's also that, right?
[Guest]: So it's not that because they, it's not like, you know, they have a craft and they have
[Guest]: documentation, they have knowledge and they've been trained, right?
[Guest]: It's quite common for people to kind of try these things everywhere.
[Guest]: If it works here, it works everywhere.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So unless you know how it actually works, right?
[Guest]: And so, which is why a lot of low-end restaurants, food ends up being slightly heavy on baking
[Guest]: soda.
[Guest]: And therefore it has that bad rap of, oh, and then people come up with all kinds of
[Guest]: fancy theories saying that no, no, they add baking soda to make you eat less at buffets,
[Guest]: which is a strange theory.
[Guest]: That's not why he would do that.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So if he's, somebody is adding something to food to physically make it taste metallic
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: That makes no sense.
[Guest]: But if he's using it to save on fuel, that makes better sense.
[Guest]: So in a sense, that is really it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, and then the fact that it is a fantastic, it's also a great tenderizer of beet.
[Guest]: In fact, your Chinese style of marinating meat, like if you go to a Chinese restaurant,
[Guest]: you get that glazed kind of feel.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So you get that silky finish to meat and it's incredibly succulent inside.
[Guest]: It's because they use baking soda in the marinade, a tiny bit.
[Guest]: And that's why you kind of get that effect.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So in fact, Indian marination uses acid, Chinese marination uses base.
[Guest]: So it's quite fascinating.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And once you're done cooking, by the way, it can also help you clean.
[Guest]: It's a fantastic deodorizer.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So if you put a small plate of baking soda in your fridge, it'll absorb all the other
[Guest]: odors.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Especially if you have like fish, et cetera, in the fridge and you don't want everything
[Guest]: to smell of fish, you know, is one way of doing this.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And it also accelerates the Maillard reaction.
[Guest]: So if you want a brown onions and you're too lazy and you don't want to spend 20 minutes,
[Guest]: a pinch of baking soda will get your onions evenly brown in no time.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So do you use more baking soda and MSG in your own cooking?
[Amit Varma]: And would you advise that Indians in general warm to MSG because that'll actually, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you spoke earlier about the wastage of spices and all of that, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: using MSG would certainly cause it to, right, let's kind of move on to the other sort of
[Amit Varma]: ingredient which should be used more in Indian cooking, but isn't, which is alcohol.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I love the starting quote, you know, which begins the chapter, which is from
[Amit Varma]: Julia Child, where she says, quote, I enjoy cooking with wine.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes I even put it in the food I'm cooking, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about alcohol and why you call it the silver medal winner in
[Amit Varma]: the hundred meter flavor extraction race.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So fat is the absolute winner in what is able to do.
[Guest]: Hot fat, right, is able to extract as much flavor, but clearly alcohol is the second,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And then with the added advantage that in the cooking process, a lot of the alcohol
[Guest]: actually burns off.
[Guest]: So it's not like you're going to get like drunk by adding a tiny amount of rum or brandy
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And also remember that, you know, beer is not alcoholic enough for it to be used as
[Guest]: an alcohol for its purposes, but beer is used as an acid because beer is acidic, right?
[Guest]: Because it has, it's carbonated.
[Guest]: So beer battered, whatever, or, you know, beer is used as a, as, as like a lemon juice
[Guest]: or something like that, but to add an acidic flavor profile, right?
[Guest]: And a complex, you know, all the complex, slightly bitter flavors of the hop also add
[Guest]: to that.
[Guest]: So you have, uh, alcohol again, you know, uh, not very common in India because of the
[Guest]: historical taboos against alcohol and brewing.
[Guest]: And the fact that the British largely got rid of a ton of, uh, local low cost brewing
[Guest]: cultures, you know, in collaboration with, with upcast Hindus, as they kind of elevated
[Guest]: them to positions of power, made them officers and, uh, you know, in the, in the original
[Guest]: civil servant, uh, and, and sort of British administration, right?
[Guest]: Uh, so there's a ton of, you know, if you look at, if you read, and I was reading some
[Guest]: of these older Tamil novels set in the pre-British era or during the British era, Perumal Murugan
[Guest]: actually talks about how the, the British guy and the Brahmins, if you will, were coming
[Guest]: after their brewing of Kaldur, right?
[Guest]: I mean, uh, so this is, this is something that he kind of mentioned.
[Guest]: So there's always been, uh, so if you have human beings, microbes and starches, you're
[Guest]: going to get alcohol.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: It's just, there's no escaping it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, um, and especially in a hot and humid part of this world where microbes work like
[Guest]: they're on steroids, you're going to get alcohol all the time, right?
[Guest]: So in the sense that it's, it's quite surprising, but I think, hopefully I think we'll kind
[Guest]: of start learning about this, um, and as at least amongst urban Indians, and if you don't
[Guest]: have like any religious strictures against the use of alcohol, I think definitely use
[Guest]: of some of the cheap wine that you get in my local Tasmac store, I think it's good only
[Guest]: for cooking.
[Guest]: I wouldn't drink it at all.
[Guest]: So, uh, so that's the good thing.
[Guest]: I mean, you use, use up cheap wine for cooking and it adds a ton of taste.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So again, fermentation is one of those magical biochemical processes that take something
[Guest]: one dimensional and adds a ton of additional dimensions of flavor, right?
[Guest]: Fermented grape, uh, it loses sweetness, but it gains a ton of other flavor profiles simply
[Guest]: by the action of yeast.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, so you take something like, imagine something like your flour or maida, which is tasteless
[Guest]: odorless powder, right?
[Guest]: You add water and you just let it sit.
[Guest]: You don't even need to add yeast because there's yeast already, you know, in the, in, in, in
[Guest]: the maida already.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It will smell delicious.
[Guest]: It will smell alcoholic.
[Guest]: It'll smell boozy.
[Guest]: It'll smell nutty.
[Guest]: It'll, you know, so the smell of fermented dough, uh, and then once you bake it, the
[Guest]: Bayard reaction just makes it all the more magic, which is why bread is so magical, right?
[Guest]: So you just take four things.
[Guest]: You take a floor, uh, water, salt, and yeast.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: And you can turn it into this universe of the most astonishing flavors by just applying
[Guest]: heat.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And so that way, um, so alcohol is a part of the production of any kind of fermentation
[Guest]: process, right?
[Guest]: Uh, at least yeast that's, uh, aerobic fermentation produces alcohol and aerobic fermentation
[Guest]: sort of produces, uh, you have, uh, uh, lactobacteria like your idli dosa and all of those are lactobacteria
[Guest]: yogurt.
[Guest]: So yeast is not involved.
[Guest]: It's usually bacteria.
[Guest]: Bacteria produce lactic acid, which is sour, right?
[Guest]: So the fermentation that produces sourness yeast fermentation produces alcohol.
[Guest]: So that's the, that's the basic principle here, right?
[Guest]: And alcohol is a fantastic additive, especially grapes, especially even hard liquor is a fantastic
[Guest]: brandy, cognac, and these things actually are fantastic for deglazing the pan.
[Guest]: So especially if you're like, you know, using a, not a nonstick, but a stainless steel,
[Guest]: a lot of things will stick to the bottom.
[Guest]: Those things that stick to the bottom of the vessel are tremendously tasty because they
[Guest]: have all those Mayard, you know, byproducts, right?
[Guest]: So once you're done with your fat and onions, kind of getting there, adding a little bit
[Guest]: of this sort of brandy or something else will unlock a lot more flavor and also remove all
[Guest]: the sticky bits from the bottom and get it into the gravy that an overtime, most of the
[Guest]: alcohol will also sort of, uh, uh, burn away and it release a lot of those other aroma
[Guest]: molecules that then get end up getting, you know, dissolved in the, uh, in the fat.
[Guest]: And so, so alcohol is a, is, is definitely a fantastic, you know, even if you don't
[Guest]: drink it yourself.
[Guest]: Um, I think it's worthwhile keeping a bottle or two in the kitchen, um, as, as a cooking
[Amit Varma]: aid.
[Amit Varma]: My favorite cooking video of all time on YouTube, and it may not be because of the, uh, this
[Amit Varma]: thing is this famous vareva video called, uh, of toddy chicken, where the chef is making
[Amit Varma]: a toddy chicken and, uh, you know, every once in a while when he has to have toddy, he'll
[Amit Varma]: say one sip for me, one sip for the chicken.
[Amit Varma]: And just, it's a fantastic, legendary, legendary, absolutely legendary video.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Cooking with toddy is a, is, is a traditional thing, uh, definitely smaller town, uh, definitely
[Guest]: more common amongst the lower down and the, the cost hierarchy you go, uh, definitely.
[Guest]: But because toddy is up, you know, uh, uh, so for example, you know, uh, uh, mallus when
[Guest]: they make appam, right?
[Guest]: The traditional way of fermenting an appam was to actually add toddy, right?
[Guest]: Because a toddy is basically is a life thing.
[Guest]: It's because it's got that culture, right?
[Guest]: So it's got the yeast culture that is going to then ferment the rest of your, these things
[Guest]: as well, right?
[Guest]: Uh, this is before we are baking soda was invented, right?
[Guest]: So then obviously nowadays, uh, people just add baking soda to the, to just before they
[Guest]: bake it.
[Guest]: So you get that soft, fluffy in the center.
[Amit Varma]: Historically, it used to be done with toddy.
[Amit Varma]: Can you speak about a couple of counterintuitive ways in which you, you use alcohol and you
[Amit Varma]: know, most people wouldn't have thought of alcohol in that context.
[Amit Varma]: Like you spoke in your book, of course, of game-changing pakoras and, uh, you know, what's
[Amit Varma]: the last time you used alcohol in your cooking and, uh, you know, if you had to give a couple
[Amit Varma]: of tips to our listeners, if they are cooking on, you know, when they can use alcohol while
[Amit Varma]: cooking Indian food.
[Guest]: So the last time I actually, so I think some people did get a bit angry that I used, uh,
[Guest]: some rum when I was making dal makhani.
[Guest]: Uh, and again, dal makhani is one of those dishes where you actually don't want to add
[Guest]: a ton of spice powders and things like that because it's the intrinsic flavor of that
[Guest]: actually comes from slow cooking the urad dal, which is an absolute, you know, rockstar
[Guest]: legume in that it is the greatest legume.
[Guest]: You give it enough time.
[Guest]: It is painfully hard to cook.
[Guest]: You have to soak it for hours and hours and cook it for several hours and so on.
[Guest]: But the longer you cook, the more amazing the texture and the flavor gets.
[Guest]: And a lot of this, you know, people don't realize that the makhani part of the dal makhani
[Guest]: doesn't come from actually adding makhani, which is very little.
[Guest]: It comes from the fact that the dal itself has a silky buttery texture, uh, the longer
[Guest]: you cook it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So it's not something like that it's, you don't need a ton of jeera powder, that powder,
[Guest]: this powder, and all these other spices and so on.
[Guest]: You want it to be minimal, just the sort of onion, ginger, garlic, the primary base sort
[Guest]: of flavors that you're likely to find in a Punjabi field.
[Guest]: And then you're going to, what I essentially do is add a little bit of that rum to deglaze
[Guest]: the pan before I add the tomatoes so that it really just amplifies the garlic and onion
[Guest]: flavors in the dish, which is exactly what you want.
[Guest]: So that is definitely one.
[Guest]: And I think the, the pakoda trick is actually something that I learned from this British
[Guest]: molecular gastronomy guy, Heston Blumenthal, right?
[Guest]: So basically this idea that one of the things alcohol does, right?
[Guest]: And one of the reasons why it's therefore used when you bake cakes, um, rum and things
[Guest]: like that, right?
[Guest]: Is that alcohol actually prevents gluten formation.
[Guest]: So gluten is essentially when you, when you add water to any kind of wheat flour, the
[Guest]: gluten and gliadin proteins kind of, you know, form this sort of structure, stretchy structure
[Guest]: which therefore allows, if you had any leavening agent, it allows it to rise, which you can't
[Guest]: get in a rice or anything, right?
[Guest]: And so the thing is that you, in a bread or a chapati, you want that, but you don't want
[Guest]: stretchy gluten kind of a texture when you're making cakes or when you're making like a
[Guest]: pakoda.
[Guest]: Especially if you're using maida as the, like a tempura state, right?
[Guest]: Not because some people not don't necessarily like using basin.
[Guest]: They also use a mix of basin and maida to get better crispiness, right?
[Guest]: So if you add a mix of maida and basin, and instead of using just water to make the batter,
[Guest]: add a little bit of vodka, the vodka will prevent the maida from forming a stretchy
[Guest]: this thing.
[Guest]: So you get an ultra crisp.
[Guest]: This thing.
[Guest]: The other thing, the trick here is to, instead of using water, if you use soda, right, that
[Guest]: will aerate the batter so that the exterior of the pakoda will be the most astonishingly
[Guest]: crisp, right?
[Guest]: So I mean, this is something that I've tried and it is like, Oh wow.
[Guest]: I mean, especially I've made a Mirchi Bhaji and it is just, this is amazing, right?
[Guest]: One the crispness outside, and then you bite into the chili and the chili is really hot
[Guest]: and then you get the dopamine high and it's quite a perfect experience.
[Amit Varma]: So see dear listeners, if you've reached the three hour mark of the show, your big revelation
[Amit Varma]: is that the recipe for great pakodas includes vodka and soda.
[Amit Varma]: That's quite superb.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I've taken a lot of your time, so I'm going to get to closing questions now.
[Amit Varma]: But in between, I'm going to say that we haven't finished all the chapters of your book yet.
[Amit Varma]: I particularly enjoyed this penultimate chapter called Burn the Recipe, where you kind of
[Amit Varma]: talk about models and meta models.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you give sort of different algorithms, gravy algorithm, rice dish algorithm, Indian
[Amit Varma]: bread algorithm, chutney and raita generators, salad generator, talk about base gravy, spice
[Amit Varma]: mixes, absolutely eye opening and I'm really going to take my time and, you know, process
[Amit Varma]: it over a period of time and not try to do it at 2x or 3x speed.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll kind of get to sort of my closing questions that I had for you.
[Amit Varma]: And while writing this book, what did you learn?
[Amit Varma]: Like I understand that a lot of this is your accumulated knowledge over the years, and
[Amit Varma]: you actually had a structure in Scrivener.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you've mentioned in another interview where you had your chapter and headings
[Amit Varma]: and then your subheadings and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of it was there.
[Amit Varma]: But I've often found that when you try to write about something in detail, you end up
[Amit Varma]: learning a lot more about it and sometimes surprising yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your sort of learning moments from this book?
[Guest]: So one is clearly the more I research to write this book, the more I realized that there
[Guest]: are fewer strict and rigid rules about how to make delicious food, that you can get to
[Guest]: a great product in a bunch of ways, and in a sense that minimalism is a great way to
[Guest]: get to the same thing, right?
[Guest]: I think we tend to overdo recipes with too many ingredients.
[Guest]: Sometimes realizing that the quarter teaspoon of jeera powder that they ask you to add actually
[Guest]: makes no difference.
[Guest]: If you have 15 other spices, you're not going to taste it, right?
[Guest]: Sometimes people don't realize that sometimes, you know, store-bought garam masala already
[Guest]: has dhania and jeera powder in it.
[Guest]: So you're not adding anything by adding that as well.
[Guest]: But recipes will say add garam masala, add jeera powder, add dhania powder, like it is
[Guest]: some kind of, you know.
[Guest]: So definitely that was definitely one learning.
[Guest]: I think the second thing I kind of learned is that clearly, I think, I taught myself
[Guest]: to, in a sense, I mean, I had this habit, but I mean, obviously, definitely sort of
[Guest]: improved during the course of this, is that reading academic papers in food science is
[Guest]: often a great way to discover food science tricks that you could apply at home.
[Guest]: And as I said, people the likes of Kenji Lopez-Alt and others have essentially done that for Western
[Guest]: cooking, right?
[Guest]: Give me an example.
[Guest]: So for instance, so there was actually this paper from, I think, Indian Institute of Science,
[Guest]: I think it was in the 1980s, right?
[Guest]: On the some 20 page white paper on idli batter fermentation, right down to what is the impact
[Guest]: of the variety of rice, the amount of amylose and amylopectin in the variety of rice, the
[Guest]: kinds of microbes involved, the common family of lactobacteria, staphylococcus, and yeast
[Guest]: involved in fermentation, and so on, and the impact of temperature, salt concentration,
[Guest]: the impact of whether you use a 2 is to 1 ratio, 3 is to 1 ratio, 4 is to 1 ratio, and
[Guest]: the variations in texture, final properties of idli, and so on.
[Guest]: I'm like, wow, I mean, I was not able to accurately get my mother to accurately describe how is
[Guest]: it that you can reliably ferment idli dough and get soft idli.
[Guest]: It's very hard to do, right?
[Guest]: Because fermentation is a wild thing.
[Guest]: I mean, you can only use your natural cues, you can kind of get a sense when something
[Guest]: is over fermented, under fermented, and so on.
[Guest]: And then once in a while, your idli is going to end up slightly hard or over sour and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: It's just the way fermentation is like that, right?
[Guest]: And I'm like, wow, this is one of those things where I could genuinely get the right down.
[Guest]: So one example is that, right, the reason you add salt when you ferment something, right,
[Guest]: is quite fascinating.
[Guest]: Salt normally kills bacteria and yeast and so on.
[Guest]: But the magic of evolution, lactobacteria have evolved the ability to live in slightly
[Guest]: salty conditions, right?
[Guest]: And the reason they do that is that, and by adding that salt, you are preventing the millions
[Guest]: of other families of bacteria and fungi that want to colonize the same food.
[Guest]: It's free food, right?
[Guest]: And so that's where you are basically helping it along.
[Guest]: So it multiplies, it is able to dominate.
[Guest]: And once it reaches a certain, you know, enough amount of a population, then lactobacteria
[Guest]: is another trick up its sleeve.
[Guest]: It produces lactic acid.
[Guest]: And that acidic environment again, closes the door for a ton of other things that again
[Guest]: will spoil your...
[Guest]: So at the end of the day, you're leaving food outside.
[Guest]: That's what it is, right?
[Guest]: And there are literally millions of microbes out there, right?
[Guest]: And so therefore, it is just that understanding this and why you add salt and therefore when
[Guest]: you should add salt, et cetera, et cetera, is I think one of those things.
[Guest]: So therefore, I think I learned a lot from reading actual academic papers.
[Guest]: They're very hard to read.
[Guest]: They're obviously aimed at a food scientist working for a consumer food company.
[Guest]: Somebody wearing lab coats and, you know, making chips or producing, you know, freeze-dried
[Guest]: idli or freeze-dried dal makhani and so on.
[Guest]: But clearly, but I think there's tons to be learned from actually going right down to
[Guest]: the scientific publications is definitely one.
[Guest]: And I think the third realization was that Indian cooking can actually be phenomenally
[Guest]: a lot more diverse if people actually stop being tethered by recipes, right?
[Guest]: And this whole notion of authenticity, right?
[Guest]: I used to feel strongly about it, but I began to feel even more strongly about it, right?
[Guest]: I think the fact that there's a Szechuan dosa is, I think, glorious.
[Guest]: It's not a matter for, oh, no, kill me now, you know, why?
[Guest]: I mean, somebody enjoys that, and it's a fantastic fusion of cuisines.
[Guest]: And literally anything you eat today was also considered fusion cuisine when one of those
[Guest]: ingredients came from Mexico or came from somewhere else, right, or a technique that
[Guest]: you borrowed from somewhere else, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I take the example of how my grandmother would make sambar when she was in a village.
[Guest]: You know, things like carrots and beans were called English vegetables because, you know,
[Guest]: they were not available in India, and they used to grow only in the colder climates of
[Guest]: Ooty and so on, right?
[Guest]: So if you're in the hotter parts, you're going to use the native, local string beans and
[Guest]: those kinds of things.
[Guest]: But the moment she got to Chennai, she would use carrot and sambar, and, you know, who's
[Guest]: to say that's not an authentic sambar because it doesn't have carrot?
[Guest]: Literally any sambar in Chennai will now have carrot, right?
[Guest]: So I think in that sense, the whole, in some sense, the chapter seven, if you will, right,
[Guest]: is fundamentally saying that, look, you know what, I think, given the amount of variety
[Guest]: we already have, I think there's an opportunity to do even more, right?
[Guest]: There's no reason why you can't make a Thai spiced chutney for your idli, right?
[Guest]: Why would you not do that, right?
[Guest]: Or a Bengali flavored chutney for your dosa, right?
[Guest]: Or eat your dosa with a kosha mangso or something like that, which is fantastic.
[Guest]: You go to rural Tabernado, I mean, dosa is always eaten with meat gravies.
[Guest]: It's a perfect canvas, if you will, for really well-spiced meat gravies, right?
[Guest]: So I think, you know, in that sense, I think that's what I learned, in the sense that we're
[Guest]: doing ourselves a disservice by thinking in these very insular terms of, this is authentic,
[Guest]: this is my home's recipe, and therefore it is authentic, and these are the only way to
[Guest]: make this, and these are the spices you need to use.
[Guest]: I think if we mix and match, I think it will probably be a more vibrant, richer, I expect
[Guest]: to see a lot more innovation, if you will, on, I think, if people are more open to some
[Guest]: of these things, I expect to see food startups and others inventing new snacks, rather than
[Guest]: just the same old things, right?
[Guest]: Essentially, if you look at Indian snacks, right, either the traditional ones, namkeens
[Guest]: and you know, those kinds of things, or you have the Western canvas of the potato chip,
[Guest]: but with desi flavors.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's really about it.
[Guest]: There's just an ocean of Indian snacks made from millets and a ton of other things, which
[Guest]: by the way, if you can apply a little bit of food science, mix a few flavors and so
[Guest]: on, why couldn't you take a murukku from, say, South India, and flavor it with mustard
[Guest]: oil and others and sell it in Bengal, right?
[Guest]: There's nothing to stop you from doing that, right?
[Guest]: But yeah, people will say, no, no, no, that's not authentic.
[Guest]: And so on.
[Amit Varma]: But I think, you know, there's a great opportunity to do that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in the last couple of minutes, you've just made a bunch of cravings explode in me
[Amit Varma]: one, I'm thinking of koshamangshu, two, I've realized that, you know, the dosa cart outside
[Amit Varma]: Mithibhai is like a five minute drive away from where I live, and I can have some schezwan
[Amit Varma]: dosa there, which by the way, I love and they have some 40-50 kinds of dosas, which are
[Amit Varma]: mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And three, you know, you mentioned new kinds of snacks.
[Guest]: Have you ever had dosa khakras?
[Guest]: No, not yet.
[Amit Varma]: I need to try that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, they're absolutely delicious.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I'm sure they'll reach Chennai at some point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I share your feelings about authenticity and this food snobbery that people have.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know where the hell it comes from.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you think about it, you know, tomatoes, potatoes, chilies, onions, none of them are
[Guest]: sanskari in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: They're all relatively recent and still, you know, we are so incredibly snobbish.
[Guest]: It is not surprising in a sense, because I think food is, unlike many other places, I
[Guest]: think food is a stronger part of community and caste and religious identity in this part
[Guest]: of the world than many other places, right?
[Guest]: So people sometimes define themselves on what they don't eat.
[Guest]: So I don't eat garlic, I don't eat mushrooms.
[Guest]: I mean, it's just that we've carved ourselves into, you know, in so many sort of these things
[Guest]: that, you know, if you're not experimental enough, the system, the culture actually makes
[Guest]: it harder for you to go to a stranger's house and eat their food, right?
[Guest]: The average Indian is hard for, you take someone, you know, from, say, a vegetarian family,
[Guest]: what would he eat if he goes to a Muslim friend's house or if he goes to a lower-caste friend's
[Guest]: house?
[Guest]: I mean, it's just that we have created these walls based on food as well, right?
[Guest]: Which is changing, thankfully, because of urban India and the fact that, you know, people
[Guest]: are open to these things and people order these things regularly now on Swiggy and they're
[Guest]: able to experiment, et cetera.
[Guest]: But if you only go by just home cooking and so on, we're very insular in the fact that
[Guest]: this food and this way of cooking, this is our food.
[Guest]: And in a way, I think food serves as a way of, in some way, the smaller divisions in
[Guest]: cuisine and exclusions and so on, make it easy for people to be homogeneously only among
[Guest]: their own selves and not marry someone else because they'll cook something you can't eat
[Guest]: and so on, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I think food is a very, very important part of that entire thing.
[Guest]: We sometimes don't give it credit.
[Guest]: You know, people in my family will sometimes say, oh, you bring caste into everything.
[Guest]: It's not like that.
[Guest]: India has changed, et cetera.
[Guest]: I'm like, no, the reality is that you cannot walk into the house of this friend I have
[Guest]: and eat what they cook.
[Guest]: You have to call well ahead of time and say, I will not eat this.
[Guest]: It's not just enough to say vegetarian.
[Guest]: You have to say, it has to be no mushroom.
[Guest]: It has to be no garlic.
[Guest]: If it's Tuesday, it has to be no, you know, something else and so on.
[Guest]: So it is just that I think it is, that's just the nature of this part of the world.
[Guest]: But hopefully, I think amongst urban India, this is hopefully changing and people will
[Guest]: be open to really experimenting a lot more and not treat food as a, as something that's
[Guest]: part of your identity.
[Guest]: I think, or at least it should be the part, that part of your identity that you're happy
[Guest]: to share and happy to have it, you know, be fused with others.
[Amit Varma]: So that's both insightful and inspiring and maybe our dream of an India in the future
[Amit Varma]: is actually a food dream when everybody eats everything.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'll ask you my closing question now and it is not one about hope or despair
[Amit Varma]: because what despair can we have when we are talking about food?
[Amit Varma]: So my question really is that, you know, listeners of this podcast are always looking to dive
[Amit Varma]: deeper.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a, give me a set of recommendations for people who really care about food, books,
[Amit Varma]: YouTube channels, movies, absolutely anything if you want to dive deeper into food.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, my number one recommendation in that regard will obviously be your superb eye-opening
[Amit Varma]: book, which I'll, you know, read again at leisure because there are parts of it I want
[Amit Varma]: to take time and process.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a must read.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, what are the books that kind of opened your mind about food and besides
[Amit Varma]: your excellent YouTube channels and we, you know, we haven't spoken much about your music.
[Amit Varma]: So someday I hope you'll come on again.
[Amit Varma]: We can kind of tackle that because I just fucking love your work.
[Amit Varma]: It's incredible.
[Amit Varma]: And we always thought that, you know, if we have an episode together, we'll talk mainly
[Amit Varma]: about music, which we haven't gotten down to doing, but someday in the future, but yeah,
[Amit Varma]: so you know, books, videos, whatever.
[Guest]: So I think one, I'll start sort of simple, right?
[Guest]: So if you want to get a little bit more into, so, you know, I had enough material to write
[Guest]: like 500 pages, right?
[Guest]: But clearly I said, no, that's, you know, that's automatically going to reduce the potential
[Guest]: audience.
[Guest]: I think 240 or 250, under 300 pages seems to be the sweet spot for someone to pick up
[Guest]: a book and say, you know what, I'm going to finish this, right?
[Guest]: So obviously I had to make a lot of choices on what I'm going to leave out, how detail
[Guest]: am I going to get in?
[Guest]: So I think a Food Lab by Kenji Alt-Lopez is, is the, you know, is fantastic.
[Guest]: It's like 700 pages might be slightly hard to source in India, hardcover and can be slightly
[Guest]: expensive, but I think you could perhaps buy the Kindle edition or, you know, something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: So that's definitely, I think really a lot of the principles I talk about, but they're
[Guest]: still applicable in, in Western cooking in, in those dishes, it's going to be the dishes
[Guest]: focused on a lot of meat and, you know, roasted vegetables and seafood and pasta, those kinds
[Guest]: of pizza and those kinds of dishes, but it's still learned tons of things from, and also
[Guest]: I think his approach to his methodology, right?
[Guest]: And literally, whereas I kind of talk about the methodology at the end, he talks about
[Guest]: the methodology while he actually describes the science of why it is very literally say,
[Guest]: I tried seven batches and this batch, I tried this, this batch, and this is the table of
[Guest]: what I found and so on.
[Guest]: So it's, I mean, remarkably sort of, I mean, it is, it is a treatise in that sense.
[Guest]: Definitely I think I would say that's the immediate next step for someone who's interested
[Guest]: in, in the depth.
[Guest]: This is the second book is a very recent read.
[Guest]: I would strongly recommend is slightly, slightly hard, but neuro gastronomy will open your
[Guest]: eyes in terms of the, how your brain perceives food.
[Guest]: It may be slightly harder to read, but just stick with it.
[Guest]: It is fantastic.
[Guest]: Actually I think there are also some, if you have a little bit of money and you have money
[Guest]: to blow, there's something called Modernist Cuisine, which is by Nathan Mirvold, the ex
[Guest]: Microsoft CTO.
[Guest]: He's become like this food science guy.
[Guest]: I think Modernist Cuisine at home, actually the original thing is actually a set of six
[Guest]: books which costs $600, therefore impractical for anyone.
[Guest]: There is a concise version called the Modernist Cuisine at home, right?
[Guest]: It is a fantastically ground up, fresh way of thinking about food.
[Guest]: Some of which, I mean, I do refer to this in, I think in chapter six or something, right?
[Guest]: Sous vide and many of these other newer techniques where ground up, he said, no, I'm going to
[Guest]: ignore all of the tradition, ancient wisdom, ground up if I really think about the chemistry
[Guest]: of it, how would I, and if I had no budgetary constraints in terms of, you know, he uses
[Guest]: like chromatographs that spin stuff and extract stuff from carrot juice at like 10,000 RPM.
[Guest]: Obviously a lot of that stuff is impractical, but it's a gorgeous book that I think you'll
[Guest]: still learn a ton about the science.
[Guest]: You're not going to be able to cook.
[Guest]: I don't think that's the intent of that book at all, right?
[Guest]: The equipment he uses is not practical at all, but it's still an amazing book if you
[Guest]: really, really want to get deep into food science.
[Guest]: This is obviously on the book side.
[Guest]: I think there are several YouTube channels that I absolutely adore.
[Guest]: I think my all time favorite has to be Bong Eats.
[Guest]: Bong Eats is just, I mean, even if you don't like cooking and if you don't like watching
[Guest]: cooking videos, I think, you know, my wife watches Bong Eats videos to just relax and
[Guest]: unwind at night because it's just gorgeously shot.
[Guest]: It's the aesthetics of it right down to the cutting, to the cooking and the ASMR nature
[Guest]: of the sounds.
[Guest]: So they pay a ton of attention.
[Guest]: They're amongst the most beautiful cooking videos ever shot anywhere in the world, right?
[Guest]: And I think, you know, single-handedly, you know, they've made me cook more Bengali dishes
[Guest]: in my kitchen than anyone else.
[Guest]: I think Bong Eats definitely.
[Guest]: When it comes to vegetarian cooking, Nisha Madhulika and Nandita Iyer are fantastic.
[Guest]: Nisha Madhulika on YouTube and Nandita Iyer on actually very well-researched recipes.
[Guest]: So it's often, you know, we don't, you know, I dunk on recipes, but it's very rare to find
[Guest]: well-researched, well-tested recipes.
[Guest]: People do it once and they document the recipe, rarely do people like, do it like, you know,
[Guest]: four or five times and then really pay close attention to actually documenting.
[Guest]: And if you like really well-researched recipes, I think Saffron Trail is a good choice there.
[Guest]: Nisha Madhulika is a fantastic source for vegetarian cooking.
[Guest]: I mean, her channel is one of the most watched in the world, I think.
[Guest]: And she's obviously fantastic.
[Guest]: And I think there are some very specific channels that I follow for other specific cuisines
[Guest]: that are just Shalu's Kitchen for Mallu cooking, especially if you like beef and pork dishes,
[Guest]: you know, that is the channel.
[Guest]: And I think there's also Madras Samayal for, so the more meat-based Tamil dishes and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: There are several others.
[Guest]: I think I'd probably, you know, I can share a list and, you know, you can probably, you
[Guest]: know, look at the show notes and so on.
[Guest]: So this is on the YouTube site.
[Guest]: And I am, unfortunately, there's a ton of cooking video, cooking content innovation
[Guest]: happens on Instagram, that's it's a platform that I don't use.
[Guest]: So I'm not really aware of what's happening on Instagram, but I'm sure there are probably
[Guest]: tons of interesting things that happen on that space as well.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, thanks so much for your time today.
[Amit Varma]: And also for providing us this rabbit hole for listeners and me to go down on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you have additional links, I'll put them in the show notes as well.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, as far as modernist cuisine is concerned, you know, after reading about it
[Amit Varma]: in your book, I went looking for it and right now on Amazon, it is $60,999.
[Amit Varma]: But I managed to find pirated PDFs, which, you know, raises that old question of what
[Amit Varma]: do you do?
[Amit Varma]: And my ethic about piracy is absolutely never except when the book is not available.
[Amit Varma]: But I would say being available at $60,000 is like being not available.
[Amit Varma]: So kindly forgive me, Mr. Murthy.
[Guest]: So I bought my copy in Singapore when I traveled, Modernist Cuisine at Home, which is about
[Guest]: $130.
[Guest]: So yeah, it's still quite expensive, but I really loved the book and so on.
[Guest]: So it's, I mean, it's a work of art just for the photographs and so on.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thanks Abit.
[Amit Varma]: Absolute pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up Masala Lab by Krish Ashok.
[Amit Varma]: I've put links to some of Ashok's remarkable work in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: So do check that out.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow him on Twitter at Krish Ashok.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and have a good time in the kitchen.
[Amit Varma]: Remember, it's your lab now.
[Amit Varma]: It's your lab.